FOREWORD
The coming ability to carry out targeted medical procedures
at the molecular level will bring unprecedented power to
the practice of medicine. Within a few short decades we can
expect a major revolution in how the human body is healed.
Nanomedicine lays the foundations for understanding this revolution
and points to where it is taking us.
Throughout science and technology, the race to obtain complete
control of the structure of matter is gaining speed and focus. From
chemistry to biotechnology, from applied physics to software,
increasing resources are being brought to bear on the goal of
nanotechnology. The term nanotechnology is used to describe a
variety of nanoscale technologies. More precise for present purposes
is molecular nanotechnology: the ability to construct objects with
atomic-scale control. In lay terms, this is often called "building
atom-by-atom"; more accurately, it means being able to bond
every atom into a specific, designed location within a larger structure.
It is easy to see that such an ability could lead to, for example,
the construction of stronger, more reliable materials, and smaller,
faster computer chips. One can also anticipate improved versions of
the molecular machines found in nature, similar to today's work in
redesigning enzymes. More advanced work should eventually
enable the building of molecular machine systems -- micron-scale and
even macro-scale systems of novel molecular machines, performing
complex operations as do the natural molecular machine systems in
living things. Such systems could in principle manufacture large
numbers of atomically-precise products—a process known as
molecular manufacturing.
For those with a medical or biological background, a description of
such powerful technological abilities at the molecular scale raises
questions regarding the potential for applications in living systems,
including the human body. The responsible use of technology
demands that these interactions be considered in advance of widespread
deployment.
For millennia, physicians and their predecessors have worked to
aid the human body in its efforts to heal and repair itself. Slowly at
first, and with accelerating speed, new methods and instruments
have been added to the physician's toolkit -- microsurgical techniques
for physically removing problematic tissue and reconfiguring healthy
tissue, antibiotics for jamming the molecular machinery of unwanted
bacteria, gene chips for rapid identification of genetic sequences.
In most cases, however, physicians must chiefly rely on the body's
self-repair capabilities. If these fail, external efforts are hopeless. We
cannot today put the component parts of human cells exactly where
they should be, and configure them as they should be to form a
healthy physiological state. There are no tools for working, precisely
and with three-dimensional control, at the molecular level.
Nanomedicine points the way to these advances, which will arm
physicians with the most important new tools in medicine since the
discovery of antibiotics. The comprehensive development of
nanomedicine will dominate medical technology research during
the first half of the 21st century, and perhaps beyond.
These are not high-risk predictions, but merely the extension of
currently-observable progress in biological and medical research.
Advances in understanding living systems in general, and the
human body in particular, have arrived at astounding speed over
the past three decades and show no signs of slowing down. The
completion of the Human Genome Project, once thought almost
impossibly ambitious, is now widely regarded as both routine and
destined to revolutionize medicine. What was visionary a short time
ago is now a minimum baseline expectation.
We can expect this now-familiar pattern to be repeated in the
field of nanomedicine. So often a goal, achievable in theory but
considered at first to be far too difficult, within a few decades
becomes first an active goal, and then an achievement.
Given its revolutionary potential, it is not too soon to examine
the goals and potential consequences of nanomedicine. Provided
that this work is firmly grounded in today's science—assuming no
new scientific principles, but only the gradual accumulation and
application of new data—we can be confident that our calculations
will give reasonable, even conservative, results.
Of course, not all physicians will choose to join in examining
the future of medicine. This is not only understandable, but quite
reasonable for those who must treat patients today, with the methods
available today. Nor is the medical researcher, working to improve
today's pharmaceuticals, spurred on by the knowledge that his or
her success—no matter how dramatic—will eventually be superseded.
In both cases, what can be done today, or next year, is the most
appropriate focus.
But only a fraction of today's physicians and researchers need look
ahead for the entire field of medicine to benefit. Those practitioners
who plan to continue their careers into the timeframe when
nanomedical developments are expected to arrive—e.g., younger
physicians and researchers, certainly those now in medical and
graduate programs—can incrementally speed the development process,
while simultaneously positioning their own work for best effect, if
they have a sound idea of where the field of medicine is heading.
Those farther along in their careers will be better able to direct
research resources today, if the goals of nanomedicine are better
understood. Nanomedicine helps us to frame the research issues that
must be addressed, and to take better-directed steps on the path
toward medical nanotechnology.
Finding the right theoretician to describe the foundations of such
a field is difficult. The research requires a high degree of
multidisciplinary ability—not the typical result of academic programs
which reward specialization. A multidisciplinary group might serve,
but would likely fail to provide the necessary conceptual integration.
K. Eric Drexler, Ph.D.
Institute for Molecular Manufacturing
Nanomedicine • Volume I
Rather, the ideal author would be a careful researcher with a broad
scientific background—in particular, one willing and able to tackle
a daunting task requiring a decade of concentrated full-time research,
constructing a technical exposition that may ultimately span thousands
of pages and citations. Robert Freitas brings all these qualities and
more to this challenging project.
Some aspects of the book will initially seem controversial. For
example, the advent of nanomedicine will redefine the very concept
of "disease" (Section 1.2.2). Today's medicine is limited to removing
tissue, replacing it with transplants and artificial materials, or helping it
repair itself. Current repair techniques require that the tissue be
metabolizing and functioning, so inactive or structurally intact but
non-functioning tissue is declared "dead." Nanotechnology will let
us repair non-functioning tissue, leading us to reexamine the concept
of clinical death used in medicine today.
This process of redefinition itself is not new in the field of medicine.
It has happened many times before and is central to the goal of
extending the frontiers of health into new territory. The advance of
the physician's reach down to control at the nanoscale is just one
more step on the long evolutionary pathway of medical history.
Also controversial will be the question of how nanomedical
techniques should be used. Science discovers natural laws and facts,
and technology extends the limits of what was possible with unaltered
natural systems. But science and technology do not speak to the
issues of what is morally or ethically correct—they can only help to
frame the context of those discussions. Seemingly simple questions
such as who is sick and who is well, how much we can do for them,
and how much it will cost, require a fundamental understanding of
the underlying scientific and technical limits of what is possible.
Beyond that, the dialogue must include value judgments, and
increasingly—if the economic and environmental costs can be
handled responsibly—the answers have been provided by the customer,
here, the patient.
There is a growing body of humanitarian, religious, and political
work in the field of bioethics. A purpose of the present volume is to
help frame the issues with a better understanding of what will be
possible technically and economically. Thus, it can provide an
essential ingredient for responsible ethical discussions while itself
staying within the bounds of scientific and engineering analysis.
Leaving aside the substantive ethical debates to come, the technical
case presented in Nanomedicine is sure to spark controversy on its
own. Those who disagree with the thrust of this book may find
segments which, taken out of context, appear unsupported or
overstated. This is almost unavoidable in the writing of any book,
much less one as ambitious as Nanomedicine. Yet the ideas in this
book are supported, as presented in their intended context, and
criticisms of them will be most valuable if they keep this context
linked to the discussion.
Both the author and publisher of Nanomedicine have graciously
agreed to publish the entire book online, accessible at no charge, to
better enable debate on, and evolution of, this work. Published
critiques, to serve the advance of knowledge, should include a
reference to the online location of this material, enabling readers to
probe questions in more depth. Online tools now allow third-party
annotation of online texts, enabling all concerned parties to contribute
to a reasoned discussion of the technical issues raised here. Robert
Freitas and I invite readers of this volume to participate in this
discussion, with the goal of furthering the evolution of knowledge
in the new and vital field of nanomedicine.
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
PREFACE & ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Molecular nanotechnology has been defined as the
three-dimensional positional control of molecular
structure to create materials and devices to molecular
precision. The human body is comprised of molecules, hence the
availability of molecular nanotechnology will permit dramatic
progress in human medical services. More than just an extension of
“molecular medicine,” nanomedicine will employ molecular
machine systems to address medical problems, and will use molecular
knowledge to maintain and improve human health at the molecular
scale. Nanomedicine will have extraordinary and far-reaching
implications for the medical profession, for the definition of disease,
for the diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions including
aging, for our very personal relationships with our own bodies, and
ultimately for the improvement and extension of natural human
biological structure and function.
Nanomedicine, the book, will be published in three Volumes over
the course of several years. The present Volume is the first in this
series. Readers wishing to keep abreast of the latest developments may
visit the nanomedicine website maintained by the Foresight Institute
(http://www.foresight.org/Nanomedicine/index.html) and may visit
http://www.nanomedicine.com, the first commercial Internet
domain exclusively devoted to nanomedicine and the online home
of this document. To date, the author has expended ~19,000
man-hours, plus ~1000 man-hours by reviewers, a total of ~10
man-years of effort.
To hold the book to a manageable length, most technical
discussions have been greatly abbreviated, usually omitting lengthy
historical surveys and extensive derivations or proofs of formulas,
but providing useful pointers to the relevant specialist literature.
Equations are presented, whenever possible, with sufficient qualifications to enable the reader to determine the extent of applicability in
a given circumstance; however, complete derivations are rarely
provided. Care should be taken in applying these mathematical
relationships, since in some cases their applicability to submicron
systems, while anticipated, has not yet been definitively established
by experiment. With more than 270 mathematical equations in this
Volume, it was impossible to maintain strict usage consistency of
variables across Chapters, although some effort was made to achieve
such consistency within individual Chapters. Clarity is enhanced by
defining all variables and constants near or immediately after each
usage in an equation. In this book, the symbol “~” signifies “approximately,” and scientific exponential notation appears throughout.
Cubic volumes are sometimes specified as, for example, (1 nm)3 to
signify a 1 nm3 block. Conversions among various units (which were
chosen to maximize interdisciplinary understanding) are summarized
in Appendix A; common abbreviations, measurement units, and prefixes employed in the text may also be found in Appendix A.
References [####] are used in this book to denote the source of:
1. a direct quotation (enclosed in quotes),
2. a lightly or heavily paraphrased passage (footnoted but not
enclosed in quotes), or
3. a specific datum.
Citations are also employed to indicate sources of additional
information on a given topic, especially literature review papers. The
author apologizes in advance for any inadvertent instances of
unattributed usage of previously published material; such events should
be few but should be brought to the author’s immediate attention for
correction in a future edition of this work. An attempt was made to cite
primary sources whenever possible, but some references are made to
secondary sources believed by the author to be reliable. Unreferenced
in-text attributions to specific named people generally refer to comments made by a technical reviewer of the manuscript, as a personal
communication.
Acknowledgments
Naturally I am replete with gratitude to many people and organizations, but my first thanks must go to K. Eric Drexler. I honor Eric
for his original vision of the revolution in future medicine that
molecular nanotechnology will inevitably bring; for patiently yet
doggedly pursuing that vision during the long hard years when this
position was not yet scientifically popular; and for describing the
inspirational concept of cellular repair machines in his popular
writings8,9 and then offering detailed technical engineering analysis
of molecular machine components, devices, and systems in
Nanosystems,
10 a textbook which has established high standards
of scholarship and has paved the way for all future
research in this area.
Next, I would like to thank the following 77 people for providing
useful references, preprints, publications or information, helpful
discussions or newsgroup postings, personal communications, or
other assistance related to the project: Rehal Bhojani, Forrest Bishop,
Frank Boehm, Jonathan Boswell, Robert J. Bradbury, Claud A.
Bramblett, Donald W. Brenner, Fred and Linda Chamberlain, Thomas
M.S. Chang, M.D., Scott R. Chubb, Sharon Churchill, Philip G.
Collins, Andrew Czarn, Jerry A. Darsey, Thomas Donaldson, K. Eric
Drexler, William L. Dye, Mark Dyer, Robert I. Eachus, James von
Ehr, James C. Ellenbogen, Gregory M. Fahy, David R. Forrest, Berry
Fowler, M.D., John Gilmore, James L. Halperin, Jie Han, Barbara and
Danny Haukedalen, Dan Heidel, Tad Hogg, Neil Jacobstein, Ted
Kaehler, Jeffrey D. Kooistra, Tobias A. Knoch, Markus Krummenacker,
Ronald G. Landes, M.D., Kevin Leung, Eric W. Lewis, M.D.,
Nanomedicine • Volume I
James B. Lewis, David Mathes, Ralph C. Merkle,
Richard Nakka, Philippe Van Nedervelde, Vik Olliver, Michael Park,
Christine L. Peterson, Christopher J. Phoenix, Frederik Pohl, Virginia
Postrel, Patrick Salsbury, Tilman E. Schaffer, J. David Schall, Nadrian
C. Seeman, Paul E. Sheehan, Brian Shock, John A. Sidles, Richard
Smith, Jeffrey Soreff, Edmund Storms, Carey Sublette, Richard P.
Terra, Tihamer Toth-Fejel, James M. Tour, Werner Trabesinger, Robert
E. Tuzun, Ty S. Twibell, Francisco Valdes, William Ware, James Brent
Wood, Christian P. Worth; four anonymous referees of early versions
of my now-published “respirocytes”1400 paper; and, finally, the one
person whose name I have inadvertently but inexcusably omitted.
I also thank Conrad Schneiker153 for his highly useful summary
of the early history of nanotechnology, which I leaned on rather
heavily in Section 1.3.2; Roy Porter, from whose excellent history of
medicine2204 I borrowed extensively in Section 1.2.1; W.J. Bishop,
whose fine book on the history of surgery2158 provided most of the
material for the first six paragraphs of Chapter 1, and substantial
material for Section 1.2.1 as well; and the Foresight Institute for
establishing and maintaining the first nanomedicine website, under
the technically-savvy webmastering of James B. Lewis.
I extend my heartfelt thanks to the 48 individuals listed below
who reviewed or commented on all or part of various Chapters in
Volume I (total number in parentheses): Douglas Berger, M.D. (1),
Forrest Bishop (2), Robert J. Bradbury (8), David Brin (1), Fred
Chamberlain (2), Linda Chamberlain (1), Gino J. Coviello (2),
Andrew Czarn (1), Thomas Donaldson (1), K. Eric Drexler (6),
William L. Dye (2), Martin Edelstein (1), Gregory M. Fahy (2),
Steven S. Flitman, M.D. (1), Tim Freeman (1), Thomas W. Gage
(2), Al Globus (2), J. Storrs Hall (2), Jan H. Hoh (1), Christopher
Jones (3), Tanya Jones (2), Ted Kaehler (1), Tobias A. Knoch (1),
Markus Krummenacker (7), Sarma Lakkaraju (1), Ronald G.
Landes, M.D. (10), Eugene Leitl (1), James B. Lewis (8), James
Logajan (5), David Mathes (4), Thomas McKendree (3), Ralph
C. Merkle (10), Hans Moravec (1), Max More (1), Kenneth
Philipson, M.D. (1), Christopher J. Phoenix (10), Virginia Postrel
(1), Edward M. Reifman, D.D.S. (1), Edward A. Rietman (6),
Markus Roberts (1), Patrick Salsbury (3), Salvatore Santoli (3), Bruce
Smith (4), Steven S. Smith (1), Jeffrey Soreff (8), Tihamer Toth-Fejel
(3), James M. Tour (1), and Steven C. Vetter (1). These reviewers
are to be lauded for undertaking a difficult task and should be held
blameless for any errors that remain in the manuscript; the author
is solely responsible for all errors of fact or judgement within these
pages. Reports of errata may be transmitted by mail to the author at
the following physical address: Robert A. Freitas Jr., Institute for
Molecular Manufacturing, 555 Bryant Street, Suite 253, Palo Alto,
CA 94301 USA; or electronically to the author at the following
Internet address: rfreitas@imm.org.
My special thanks go to Robert J. Bradbury and Markus
Krummenacker for particularly lengthy and detailed Chapter
reviews, and for illuminating the often shadowy boundaries between
biotechnology and nanotechnology; to Jeffrey Soreff for his stunningly
insightful commentary and analysis of the most difficult technical
concepts (on occasions almost too numerous to count), for his
advice on equations and technical phraseology, and for several capsule
descriptions of recent research results that are reported in Chapter 2;
to Chris Phoenix for reading the entire manuscript with alacrity; to
Ralph C. Merkle for his many years of sage technical advice and his
unwavering encouragement when it was needed most; and to K.
Eric Drexler and Ralph C. Merkle for generously contributing the
Foreword and Afterword, respectively, to this Volume.
My very special thanks go to James L. Halperin, Ralph C. Merkle,
many anonymous Senior Associates of the Foresight Institute, and
other friends, family, and colleagues who generously provided
financial support which enabled the author to complete this Volume;
and to the Foresight Institute for establishing the Nanomedicine
Book Fund.
I thank my publisher, Ronald G. Landes, M.D., for having the
perspicacity to recognize the potential significance of nanomedicine,
the trust in the author to impose no major constraints on substance,
length or time, the fortitude to publish an unusual book of uncertain
marketability in a difficult business environment, and the audacity
to dare to present the material contained herein to medical and
publishing colleagues for their serious consideration. I also applaud
Cynthia Dworaczyk, Michelle Wamsley, Penny King, and the rest
of the staff of Landes Bioscience for their excellent and professional
work on this project, and Andreas Passens for the cover art.
Finally, and most importantly, I wish to thank my wife, Nancy
Ann Freitas, and my parents, Robert A. Freitas Sr. and Barbara Lee
Freitas, without whose help, understanding, and encouragement this
book could not have been written.
Robert A. Freitas Jr.
Research Fellow
Institute for Molecular Manufacturing
15 April 1999
No new findings will ever be made if we rest content with the findings of the past. Besides, a man who follows
someone else not only doesn’t find anything, he is not even looking. “But surely you are going to walk in your
predecessors’ footsteps?” Yes indeed, I shall use the old road, but if I find a shorter and easier one I shall open
it up. The men who pioneered the old routes are leaders, not our masters. Truth lies open to everyone. There
has yet to be a monopoly of truth. And there is plenty of it left for future generations too.
 — Seneca, the Younger (4 BC - 65 AD)
We are like children standing on the shoulders of a giant, for we can see all that the giant can see, and a little
more.
 — Guy de Chauliac, Chirurgia Magna, 1362
The human mind is often so awkward and ill-regulated in the career of invention that it is at first diffident,
and then despises itself. For it appears at first incredible that any such discovery should be made, and when
it has been made, it appears incredible that it should so long have escaped men’s research. All which affords
good reason for the hope that a vast mass of inventions yet remains, which may be deduced not only from the
investigation of new modes of operation, but also from transferring, comparing, and applying these already
known, by the method of what we have termed literate experience.
— Francis Bacon, Novum Organum: Aphorisms on the Interpretation of Nature and the Empire of Man, 1620
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 1
1.1 A Noble Enterprise
The history of disease is vastly older than that of humankind
itself. Indeed, disease and parasitism have been
inseparable companions to life since the dawn of life on Earth.
Fossilized bacteria similar to those responsible for many infections that
afflict people today have been found in geological formations that are
500 million years old. Fossil shells dating from an era almost equally
remote show clear evidence of disturbance by injury and parasites.
Examination of the skeletons of long-extinct dinosaurs and other
great reptiles show that these creatures suffered from fractures, bone
tumors, arthritis, osteomyelitis, dental caries and other diseases that
still plague us in the 20th century. While available fossil evidence is
largely limited to changes observable in bones and teeth, it is
probably safe to assume that disease processes were equally prevalent in
the soft organs and tissues that have not been geologically preserved,
and that the general pattern of disease has not changed in its
essentials during the hundreds of millions of years that animal life
has existed on this planet.2158
Since its first appearance on the prehistoric stage millions of years
ago, the human body has also been constantly subject to
assault and injury, invasion by parasites, extremes of heat and cold,
and infections. Early man probably suffered from a number of
diseases due to nutritional factors and body chemistry disorders.
For example, the poor condition of the teeth of an 18-year old
Australopithecus who lived 1.75 million years ago, found at Olduvai
Gorge by Louis Leakey2187,2188 in 1959, suggests that the hominid
had a disease that lasted for many months — most likely gastroenteritis due to malnutrition — with three major attacks of the disease
at the ages of two, four, and four and a half.2186 Diseases that may
date back more than 25 million years to the ape ancestors of modern
apes and man2190,2191 are amoebic dysentery, malaria,2189 pinworm
infections, syphilis, yaws,2199 and yellow fever. Diseases which may
have appeared and evolved with man2198 include leprosy and
typhoid; certain modern diseases such as cholera, measles,2196,2197
mumps, smallpox, whooping cough, and the common cold require
large concentrated populations to support them, thus probably could
not have existed in the prehistoric era.2186,2191-2195
As for cancer, Java man, first discovered by Dutch anatomist
Eugene Dubois in 1891 and considered to be half a million years
old, had a morbid growth on his femur. It is likely that bone cancer and
other forms of cancer have existed from the earliest times. The
remains of Neanderthal, a competing species to Homo sapiens that
roamed through Europe, Africa, and the Near East during the last
glacial period ~75,000 years ago, show clear evidence of arthritis,
tooth loss, and suppurative bone disease. (The high rate of broken
bones and early death suggests that Neanderthals engaged in more
close-quarter combat with large animals than did modern humans,
who had figured out safer strategies.2329) Human bones unearthed
The Prospect of Nanomedicine
from the New Stone Age period reveal that Neolithic man suffered
from arthritis, congenital dislocations and fractures, sinusitis,
tuberculosis of the spine, and tumors.2158
In considering the question of how our earliest ancestors dealt
with these conditions, we are on somewhat uncertain ground, since
little direct evidence has been preserved. Anthropologists point out
that in pre-Neanderthal hunter-gatherer tribes, a sick or lame person
is a serious handicap to a group on the move. In the event of major
illness or mortal wounds, sufferers may either leave the group, be
abandoned, or, as with lepers in medieval Europe, may be ritually
expelled, becoming “culturally dead” before they are biologically
dead. Early hunter-gatherer hominid bands were more likely to
abandon their seriously sick than to succor them,2204 although
Cro-Magnons and Neanderthals evidently were the first to care for
their wounded and disabled, and to bury their dead.2341-2343
But moderate wounds, bruises, fractures, or foreign bodies such
as arrowheads or thorns are tangible things that demand attention.
Thus the art of surgery must first have originated as a response to
immediate crises. The first and most obvious course of action of a
wounded man would be to protect the site of injury from the influence
of external forces or agents. For this there was, and remains to this
day, only one means — the application of a dressing. Many observations were made and many substances tried, and in time a body of
experience was accumulated and passed on orally to others for use in
similar emergencies, eventually creating a considerable sum of
inherited empirical knowledge. It is believed that the art of dressing
wounds long constituted the whole of medicine — the use of internal
remedies or herbs, and use of the knife or fire, came much later. 2158
Present-day primitive and folk medicines provide additional clues
to early medical practice. For example, many early peoples
developed effective methods to control bleeding — the use of
cobwebs is an ancient folk remedy, as is the application of
tourniquets, packing with absorbent materials, the laying on of snow
or, at the other temperature extreme, the application of
cautery by hot knife or spear.2158,2204The Masai and Akamba tribes
treated sword wounds by slapping on a poultice of cow dung and
dust. The suturing of wounds is practiced by some primitive peoples
and may have been known to prehistoric man. Bone needles
furnished with an eye have been found in paleolithic
deposits in France and England, and some Indian tribes suture with
threads of sinew or bone needles (the needles are left in and the thread
is twisted around them). One of the strangest suturing techniques,
observed among primitive tribal cultures in such widely separated
places as India, East Africa and Brazil, is the sealing of wounds,
especially abdominal wounds, using termites or ants. The edges of
the wound are drawn closely together and the insect is allowed to
bite through them both, firmly securing the flesh on two sides. Once
2 Nanomedicine • Volume I
attached, the insect’s body is severed, allowing only the jaws to
remain in place, holding the wound shut.2158
While able to deal with wounds, early man did not admit the
existence of disease from “natural causes”. Internal diseases were
generally ascribed to malevolent influences exercised by a supernatural
entity or a human enemy. As centuries passed, many internal
diseases were eventually recognized and simple treatments
empirically established — for example, Celsus (ca. 30 AD), a Roman
medical writer, described ligature (tying off blood vessels), suturing the
large intestine, eye operations such as couching for cataract,
tonsillectomy, and bladder surgery to remove stones.2200 But the
rational basis for internal medicine awaited basic physiological
knowledge such as the circulation of the blood, finally proven by
William Harvey (1578-1657) in 1628, and the discovery and
acceptance of the theory of infection by microorganisms in the
1800s. Throughout most of human history, life has been short
indeed — Table 1.1 shows the average age of death for a sampling
of persons buried in Roman times. (Some variation may represent
regional differences in burial practices.) Even by the 17th century,
more than half of all children never lived past the age of ten,
often succumbing to diseases such as cholera, diphtheria, scarlet
fever, or whooping cough, or being scarred for life by smallpox. It
was a common and widely accepted fact of life that people would
die at all ages, although wealthy families could leave town every
year during the cholera season.1724
One of the constant missions of human civilization has been the
avoidance and elimination of animals that prey on humans. Cavedwelling carnivorous saber-toothed tigers, having occupied the upper
echelons of the food chain for 30-35 million years, finally became
extinct not more than about ten thousand years ago, most likely at
the hands of newly-arrived human hunters crossing the Siberian
land bridge into post-Pleistocene North America.2186 As late as
medieval times, wolves ranged freely over Europe, remaining abundant
in France through 1500 AD — in winter, audacious wolf packs
would enter Paris and eat children, dogs, and even adults who were
alone on the streets.1724 With technological advances, extant tiger
and wolf species are now largely confined to artificial habitats or isolated nature preserves and no longer pose any serious threat to human health. People in most places are not eaten by wolves; indeed
today, a few venturesome individuals actually keep and breed wolves
with dogs, as pets.
Bacteria are among the last remaining “wild animals” on Earth
that threaten man. As our instrumentalities continue to progress
from the macroscale to the microscale, and finally to the molecular
or nanoscale, all of the remaining natural “wild things” that endanger
human life and health — whether viruses, bacteria, protozoa, metazoan parasites,3253,3254 or even our own pathological native cells — will
be confined and tamed, reconstructed or eliminated. Using smaller
tools, we hunt smaller prey. As with sabertooths in the post-Neolithic
era, and with wolves in post-medieval times, people of the 21st century will no longer fear or need suffer predation by wild microbes
or tumor cells run amok.
Humanity is poised at the brink of completion of one of its greatest
and most noble enterprises. Early in the 21st century, our growing
abilities to swiftly repair most traumatic physical injuries, eliminate
pathogens, and alleviate suffering using molecular tools will begin
to coalesce in a new medical paradigm called nanomedicine.
Nanomedicine may be broadly defined as the comprehensive
monitoring, control, construction, repair, defense, and improvement
of all human biological systems, working from the molecular level,
using engineered nanodevices and nanostructures.
In this book we shall explore in preliminary fashion a few of the
technical details, specific requirements, and physical limitations of these
engineered nanodevices, and the meaning of nanomedicine within
the context of the traditional healing arts. Since at this writing these
nanodevices cannot yet be built, our subject matter is of necessity somewhat speculative, albeit thoroughly grounded in the best scientific and
engineering knowledge currently available. Medical philosopher
Edmond A. Murphy notes that “to the physician, the more remote
the area of speculation from the welfare of the patient, the more
clearly [this speculation] must be shown to give promise of ultimate
benefit”.2228 The author believes that nanomedicine clearly meets,
indeed vastly exceeds, this stringent requirement for relevance and
utility.
After the manner of many contemporary medical school
programs, the present trilogy progresses from a general emphasis on
basic science and engineering capabilities in Volume I, to nanomedical
tools and systems in Volume II, leading finally to a sharp focus on
clinical nanomedicine in Volume III.
1.2 Current Medical Practice
In order to fully appreciate the changes that nanomedicine will
inevitably bring, it is useful first to review the history and
development of current medical practice. As Winston Churchill once
remarked: “The further backward you look, the further
forward you can see.” The author unapologetically favors what medical
anthropologists would regard as the “Western” healing tradition.
The great medical theorist Otto E. Guttentag2234 agreed:
“Contemporary Western medicine involves a type of healing that
potentially and actually exceeds all other approaches in maintaining
that optimal status of selfhood we call being healthy and in
eliminating that reduced status of selfhood we call being sick.”
After summarizing the history of scientific medicine and placing
nanomedicine in its proper historical context (Section 1.2.1), we
define exactly what is meant by “medicine” and present a new model
for “disease” (Section 1.2.2). The modern medical treatment
methodology is examined in light of the changes that will be wrought
by nanomedicine (Section 1.2.3), and this is followed by a discussion
of several important issues in the evolution of medical bedside
practice (Section 1.2.4) and the changing view of the human body
(Section 1.2.5).
Many fascinating and important practical issues such as medical
privacy rights, patient compliance, medical ethics and bioethics per
se, nursing, the role of medical bureaucracies in the doctor-patient
interaction, and the question of medical causality2230 are not addressed
here or are deferred to Chapter 31.
Table 1.1. Average Age of Death of Persons Buried in Roman
Times2201
Burial Location Average Age of Death
City of Rome 29.9 years
Iberia 31.4 years
Britain 32.5 years
Germany 35.0 years
North Africa 46.7 years
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 3
1.2.1 The Evolution of Scientific Medicine
A study of the history of “scientific” or Western medical
practice suggests a continuity in certain aspects of the medical
paradigm292 even since ancient times — as for instance the basic
precepts of observation and diagnosis, followed by treatment —
but reveals changes in attitudes, techniques, and instrumentalities, and
a gradual evolution in the epistemology and ontology of medical
logic. Figure 1.1 presents a simple model of this historical progression,
the details of which will soon become clear. Note that 2010 is marked
as a possible date for the first applications of nanomedicine. These
will most likely be ex vivo applications only — in vivo nanomedical
treatments may come much later.
Another important reason to study the history of medicine3192 is to
gain a deeper appreciation of the long, hard struggle to
improve human health, a struggle that is expected finally to
culminate in victory in the 21st century. If the ~10 billion people
that have ever lived survived an average of 40 years and spent 5% of
their lives in sickness or physical misery from disease, then ~200
trillion man-hours of suffering have been paid to achieve this
remarkable result, a not inconsiderable price.
There is no pretense to completeness here. For example,
Chinese, Indian and Islamic contributions are omitted, not
because they are unimportant, but because they did not
significantly alter the evolutionary pathway of the Western medical
paradigm. A great deal of physiology, pathology, neurology,
systematics, and many other important medical-related disciplines
are also neglected in the interest of brevity. Much of the following
discussion, including most of the anecdotal quotations, is
liberally and appreciatively drawn from comprehensive works by
W.J. Bishop,2158 Roy Porter,2204,2205 William H. McNeill,2206 and
the Cecil Textbook of Medicine.
2207
1.2.1.1 Prehistoric Medicine
The elementary nature of prehistorical medical practice has
already been mentioned. There is direct evidence that Stone Age man
used a natural fungus as a treatment for intestinal parasites.3244 Besides
basic wound-tending, the practice of circumcision is an age-old form
of simple surgery with a rational, if sometimes controversial, hygienic
basis.
An even more dramatic surgical operation, for which there is
considerable prehistoric fossil evidence, is trephining the skull to
remove a round piece of bone from it. This can be done using flint
instruments, either by gradually scratching through the skin and
bones of the skull, getting gradually deeper and deeper, or by drilling a
series of small holes in a circle in the skull, then cutting the small
bridges between to remove a disk of bone. Skulls have been found
with multiple holes. The additional fact that some hole edges show
callus formation (evidence of healing) indicates survival of the patient.
Trephined skulls have been found in Western Europe, including
England, North Africa, Asia, the East Indies, New Zealand, and the
Americas from Alaska in the north down through the continent to
Peru in the south. The practice was probably regarded as therapeutic,
either to remove a depressed fracture, to try to cure mental illness, or
to relieve severe headache or epilepsy, presumably by letting out the
demon possessing the patient.
1.2.1.2 Ancient Mesopotamian Medicine
The first written records, which came from ancient Babylon and
Egypt, contain the earliest references to medical care,
obviously codifying earlier practices no record of which has
survived. The medicine of the Sumerians of Mesopotamia from ca.
3000 BC was primarily religious. The Mesopotamian peoples saw
the hands of the gods in everything. Disease was caused by spirit
invasion, sorcery, malice, or the breaking of taboos, and
sickness was both judgement and punishment. An Assyrian text circa
650 BC describes epileptic symptoms within a demonological framework: “If at the time of the possession, his mind is awake, the demon
can be driven out; if at the time of his possession his mind is not so
aware, the demon cannot be driven out.” Headaches, neck pain,
intestinal ailments and impotence were read as omens. The appropriate
remedy was to identify the demons responsible and expel them by
spells or incantations.
But medicine also had an empirical component, with some
sicknesses being ascribed to cold, dust and dryness, putrefaction,
malnutrition, venereal infection and other natural causes. The
Babylonians drew on an extensive pragmatic materia medica — some
120 mineral drugs and twice that number of vegetable items are
listed in surviving tablets. Alongside various fats, oils, honey,* wax,
and milk, were many active ingredients that included mustard,
oleander and hellebore (a plant in the buttercup family that is a
violent gastrointestinal poison, hence acts as a powerful purgative,
though it is lethal in high doses). Colocynth, senna and castor oil
were used as laxatives, while wound dressings were compounded
with dried wine dregs, salt, oil, beer, juniper, mud or fat, blended
with alkali and herbs. With the discovery of distillation, the
*Honey also was known to the ancients as a preservative agent. The corpses of military leaders who had died far from home and needed to be transported long distances were
often immersed in honey to prevent decomposition. Famous historical examples from later Greek and Roman times include the Spartan commander Agesilaus (d. 362 BC) and
Alexander the Great (d. 323 BC).2333,3259
Fig. 1.1. Evolution of the paradigm of scientific medicine.
4 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Mesopotamians made essence of cedar and other volatile oils.
Turpentine, asafetida, henbane, myrrh, mint, poppy, fig, and
mandrake are also mentioned. Dog dung and other fecal
ingredients were used to drive off demons.
Surgical conditions such as wounds, fractures and abscesses were
also treated by Mesopotamian surgeons. Practitioners were priests,
and after 2000 BC, they were ruled by the strict laws
included in the Code of Hammurabi. The Code laid down
rewards for success and severe punishment for failure, and
contained laws relating to medical practice which show that
medicine and surgery were highly organized professions. Fees were
regulated on a sliding scale of rewards based on the patient’s rank,
and severe penalties were laid down for failure:
“Concerning the wounds resulting from operations it is
written: if a physician shall produce on anyone a severe wound with a
bronze operating knife and cure him, or if he shall open an abscess with
the operating knife and preserve the eye of the patient, he usually shall
receive 10 shekels of silver [more than a craftsman’s annual pay]; if it is
a slave, his master shall usually pay 2 shekels of silver to the physician.”
“If a physician shall make a severe wound with an operating knife and
kill him, or shall open an abscess with an operating knife and destroy
the eye, his hands shall be cut off.”
“If a physician shall make a severe wound with a bronze
operating knife on the slave of a free man and kill him, he shall
replace the slave with another slave. If he shall open an abscess with a
bronze operating knife and destroy the eye, he shall pay the half of the
value of the slave.”
The Hammurabic Code also mentions the Gallabu, or
barber-surgeons, whose province was minor surgery, including
dentistry and the branding of slaves. If Herodotus (ca. 485-425
BC) may be believed, Babylonian medicine must have declined in the
5th century BC. Herodotus states that there were no physicians, but
that the people brought their sick into the marketplace in order
that passers-by might make suggestions or offer cures.
1.2.1.3 Ancient Egyptian Medicine
The civilization of ancient Egypt dates from around 3000 BC.
As in Mesopotamia, ancient Egyptian medicine was religiousempirical. An examination of the preserved bodies of members of
the Royal family has provided much information on the diseases of
ancient Egypt, including congenital deformities such as clubfoot,
dental caries, gallstones, bladder and kidney stones, rheumatoid
arthritis, mastoiditis, numerous eye diseases, and bone fractures,
some of which show treatment by quite sophisticated splinting. Other
evidence suggests that the average ancient Egyptian was
extremely diseased. For example, a weaver who died in the 11th
century BC, aged 14-18 years, evidently suffered from schistosomiasis,
tapeworm likely associated with malnutrition, anthracosis of the
lungs presumably due to environmental pollution from cooking
and heating, pulmonary silicosis, and possibly malaria and fleas.
The Ebers Papyrus (ca. 1550 BC), deriving from Thebes, is the
principal medical document and may be the oldest surviving medical
book. Over 20 meters long, it deals with scores of diseases and
proposes remedies involving spells and incantations, but also
includes many rational treatments. The Ebers Papyrus covers 15
diseases of the abdomen, 29 of the eyes, and 18 of the skin, and,
perhaps unsurprisingly to the modern consumer, lists no fewer than
21 cough treatments. About 700 drugs and 800 formulations are
mentioned, mainly involving herbs but also including mineral and
animal remedies. For example, to cure night blindness the patient
should eat fried ox liver — possibly a tried-and-tested procedure,
since liver is rich in Vitamin A,749 lack of which causes the illness.
Eye disorders were also common, for example:
“To drive away inflammation of the eyes, grind the stems of the juniper
of Byblos, steep them in water, apply to the eyes of the sick person and he
will be quickly cured. To cure granulations of the eye, prepare a remedy
of cyllyrium, verdigris, onions, blue vitriol, powdered wood, and mix
and apply to the eyes.”
For stomach ailments, a decoction of cumin, goose-fat and milk
was recommended, but other remedies sound more exotic, including a
drink prepared from black ass testicles. A mixture of vulva and penis
extracts and black lizard was supposed to cure baldness. Also good
for hair growth was a compound of hippopotamus, lion, crocodile,
goose, snake and ibex fat — merely assembling these ingredients
might promise a hair-raising experience! Egyptian medicine credited
many vegetables and fruits with healing properties, and also tree
products such as sycamore bark and resins such as myrrh, frankincense
and manna. As in Mesopotamia, plant extracts — notably senna,
colocynth and castor oil — were employed as purgatives, and oil of
camomile to improve digestion. Recipes included ox spleen, pig’s
brain, stag’s horn, honey-sweetened tortoise gall, and the blood and
fats of various animals. Antimony, copper salts, alum, and other
minerals were recommended as astringents or disinfectants. Containing ingredients from leeks to lapis lazuli — including garlic, onion, tamarisk, cereals, spices, condiments, resins, gums, dates, hellebore, opium and cannabis — compound drugs were administered in
the form of pills, ointments, poultices, fumigations, inhalations,
gargles and suppositories; they might even be blown into the urethra through a tube. Among the most interesting of the healers whose
names have been recorded for posterity are Peseshet, head female physician or overseer, proof of the existence, as in Mesopotamia, of female
healers; and Iri, Keeper of the Royal Rectum, presumably the
pharaoh’s enema expert.
The Edwin Smith Papyrus (ca. 1600 BC), discovered by its
American namesake at Luxor in 1862, may be the world’s earliest
surviving surgical text, and contains material probably derived from
even more ancient times. The “book of wounds” comprises 48 case
reports, which commence with the top of the head and proceed
systematically downward — nose, face, ears, neck and chest,
mysteriously stopping in mid-sentence at the spine, presumably
when the scribe was interrupted at his work. The only surgical
conditions treated were wounds, fractures, abscesses, and circumcisions.
In the Papyrus, the method of presentation is first to set out the
title or the chief symptom, followed by the further symptoms, and
then the examination, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. The
advice given is entirely rational, as will be seen by the following
directions for the treatment of a fractured humerus:
“Instructions concerning a Break in his Upper Arm. If thou examinest
a man having a break in his upper arm, and thou findest his upper arm
hanging down, separated from its fellow, thou shouldst say concerning
him: One having a break in his upper arm. An ailment which I will treat.”
“Thou shouldst place him prostrate on his back, with something folded
between his two shoulder blades; thou shouldst spread out with his two
shoulders in order to stretch apart his upper arm until that break falls
into its place. Thou shouldst make for him two splints of linen, and
thou shouldst apply for him one of them both on the inside of his arm,
and the other of them both on the underside of his arm. Thou shouldst
bind it with ymrw [an unidentified mineral substance], and treat it
afterward with honey every day until he recovers.”
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 5
An interesting point in the case histories is that after the diagnosis
the writer gives a decision about his further course of action. The
verdict may take one of three forms: (1) an ailment which I will
treat; (2) an ailment with which I will contend; and (3) an ailment
not to be treated. Like modern military triage, the “hopeless” patient is
left to his inevitable fate. This guarded attitude on the part of the
medical man was widespread in antiquity. While present-day doctors
generally do everything possible to alleviate symptoms to the very
end, even when the patient has no chance of recovery, the view in
ancient times was that hopeless cases were not to be touched. This
attitude was entirely practical. A doctor in attendance at the courts
of ancient Egypt might expect rich rewards if his patient recovered,
but if a patient died under his care, the unfortunate physician ran a
grave risk of impalement.
1.2.1.4 Ancient Greek Medicine
By 1000 BC the communities later collectively known as the
Greeks were emerging around the Aegean Sea. How much medical
knowledge they took from Egypt remains controversial, but the
contrasts between the two are striking. Little is known of Greek
medicine before the appearance of written texts in the 5th century
BC. Archaic Greece had its folk healers, including priest healers
employing divination and herbs. From early times (the first Olympic
games were recorded in 776 BC), the love of athletics produced
instructors in exercise, bathing, massage, gymnastics and diet. The
Homeric epics (ca. 600 BC) offer glimpses of early Greek medicine.
Scholars count 147 cases of battle wounds in the Iliad, including
106 spear thrusts, 17 sword slashes, 12 arrow shots, and 12 sling
shots. Among the arrow wound survivors was King Menelaus of
Sparta, whose physician extracted the arrow, sucked out the blood
and applied a salve. As with other medical interventions in Homer,
this shows no Egyptian influence, supporting the idea that, even if
Greek practice owed much to Egypt, it rapidly went its own way.
Various Greek gods and heroes were identified with health and
disease, the chief being Asclepius, who even had the power to raise
the dead. A heroic warrior and blameless physician, Asclepius was
the son of Apollo, sired upon a mortal mother, who was taught
herbal remedies by Chiron and then generously used them to heal
humans. Incensed at being cheated of death, Hades, the ruler of the
underworld, appealed to the supreme god, Zeus, who obligingly
dispatched Asclepius with a thunderbolt, though he was later
elevated to godhood. A different version appears in Homer, who
portrays Asclepius as a tribal chief and a skilled wound healer whose
sons became physicians and were called Asclepiads, and from whom
all Asclepian practitioners descended. As the tutelary god of medicine,
Asclepius is usually portrayed with a beard, staff and snake — the
origin of the caduceus symbol of the modern physician, with its
two snakes intertwined, double-helix like, on a winged staff. The
god was often shown accompanied by his daughters, Hygeia (health
or hygiene) and Panacea (cure-all).
For all that, Hippocratic medicine, the foundation of Greek
written medicine, explicitly grounds the art upon a quite different
basis — a healing system independent of the supernatural and built
upon natural philosophy. The beginnings of true medical science in
the West were established when the reliance on superstition that
underpinned tribal medicine was replaced by civilized and rational
curiosity about the cause of illness. The growth of civilized thought
allowed for argument on medical cause and cure, with great doctrinal
multiplicity. The separation of medicine from religion reveals
another distinctive feature of Greek healing: its openness, a quality
characteristic of Greek intellectual activity in general, owing to
political diversity. There was no imperial Hammurabic Code and,
unlike Egypt, no state medical bureaucracy, nor were there
examinations or professional qualifications. Those calling themselves
doctors (iatroi) had to compete with bone-setters, exorcists, rootcutters, incantatory priests, gymnasts, and showmen, exposed to
the quips of playwrights and the criticism of philosophers. Medicine
was open to all.
Empedocles (fl. 450 BC) may have been the first to advance
some of the key physiological doctrines in Greek medicine, including
innate heat as the source of living processes such as digestion, the
cooling function of breathing, and the notion that the liver makes
the blood that nourishes the tissues. His contemporary, Alcmaeon
of Croton (fl. 470 BC), believed that the brain, not the heart, was
the chief organ of sensation. Alcmaeon’s examination of the eyeball
led him to discern the optic nerve leading into the skull, a genuine
observational basis. He gave similar explanations for the sensations
of hearing and smelling, because the ear and nostrils suggested passages
leading to the brain. Most of such knowledge depended heavily on
wound observation and animal dissection, for in the classical period
the dignity of the human body forbade dissection.
All we know for sure of Hippocrates (ca. 460-377 BC), who
“taught all that were prepared to pay,” is that he was born on the
island of Cos and lived a long and virtuous life. The sixty or so
works comprising the Hippocratic Corpus (ca. 440-340 BC) derive
from a variety of hands, and, as with the books of the Bible, they
became jumbled up, fragmented, then pasted together again in
antiquity. What is now called the Corpus was gathered around 250
BC in the Library at Alexandria, with further texts added later still.
Some volumes are philosophical, others are teaching texts or case
notes. What unites them all is the conviction that health and
disease are capable of explanation by reasoning about nature,
independently of supernatural interference. Man is governed by the
same physical laws as the cosmos, hence medicine must be an
understanding, empirical and rational, of the workings of the body
in its natural environment. Anticipating modern medicine, appeal
to reason, rather than to rules or to supernatural forces, gives
Hippocratic medicine its distinctiveness. It was also patient- rather
than disease-centered; the Hippocratics specialized in medicine by
the bedside, prizing trust-based clinical relations:
“Make frequent visits; be especially careful in your examinations,
counteracting the things wherein you have been deceived at the changes.
Thus you will know the case more easily, and at the same time you will
also be more at your ease. For instability is characteristic of the humours,
and so they may also be easily altered by nature and by chance.”
“...Keep a watch also on the faults of the patients, which often make
them lie about the taking of things prescribed. For through not taking
disagreeable drinks, purgative or other, they sometimes die. What they
have done never results in a confession, but the blame is thrown upon
the physician.”
The Hippocratics promulgated the idea of “vis medicatrix
naturae,” or the power of nature to cure itself, and thus the belief
that there was a natural tendency for things to get better on their
own. This tendency could be aided by providing a beneficial
environment for the patient and by improving physical function
with a regimen of suitable diet, lifestyle, and exercise — the diatetica.
In extreme cases, further aids to recovery could be sought.
Stubbornly offending “humors” could be removed with the help of
venesection (phlebotomy or bloodletting) and purgatives, sudorifics
applied to induce sweating, and diuretics to increase urination. But
the Hippocratic physician was extremely reluctant to administer
drugs of any kind, because the physician’s goal was to aid nature in
healing the body.
6 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Hippocratics scorned heroic interventions and left risky
procedures to others. Their Oath (Chapter 31) explicitly forbade
cutting, even for stones, and other texts reserved surgery for those
used to handling war wounds. Surgery was regarded as an inferior
trade, the work of the hand rather than the head, a fact reflected in
its name: “surgery” derives from the Latin “chirurgia,” which comes
from the Greek “cheiros” (hand) and “ergon” (work); surgery was
handiwork. Hippocratic surgical texts were thus conservative in
outlook, encouraging a tradition in which doctors sought to treat
complaints first through management, occasionally through drugs,
and finally, if need be, by surgical intervention.
The art of diagnosis involved creating a profile of the patient’s
lifestyle, work and dietary habits, partly by asking questions and
partly by the use of trained senses:
“When you examine the patient, inquire into all particulars; first how
the head is...then examine if the hypochondrium [abdomen beneath
lower ribs] and sides be free of pain, for...if there be pain in the side,
and along with the pain either cough, tormina [painful intestinal colic]
or bellyache, the bowels should be opened with clysters [enema].... The
Physician should ascertain whether the patient be apt to faint when he
is raised up, and whether his breathing is free...”
Hippocratics prided themselves on their clinical acuity, being
quick to pick up telltale symptoms, as with the facies hippocratica,
the facial look of those dying from long-continued illness or cholera: “a
protrusive nose, hollow eyes, sunken temples, cold ears that are drawn
in with the lobes turned outward, the forehead’s skin rough and
tense like parchment, and the whole face greenish or black or bluegrey or leaden.” Experience was condensed into aphorisms, as for
instance: “When sleep puts an end to delirium, it is a good sign.”
The technique most prized among Hippocratics was the art of
prognosis — a secular version of the priestly and oracular prognostications of earlier medicine, and bearing some analogy to the 20th
century weatherman, who can give a bright or gloomy forecast but
is powerless to change it. Noted one Hippocratic text:2240
“It appears to me a most excellent thing for the physician to cultivate
Prognosis; for by foreseeing and foretelling, in the presence of the sick,
the present, the past, and the future, and explaining the omissions which
patients have been guilty of, he will be the more readily believed to be
acquainted with the circumstances of the sick; so that men will have
confidence to entrust themselves to such a physician....Thus a man will
be the more esteemed to be a good physician...from having long anticipated
everything; and by seeing and announcing beforehand those who will
live and those who will die.”
The ultimate significance of Hippocratic medicine was twofold.
First, it carved out a lofty role for the selfless physician which would
serve as a lasting model for professional identity and conduct. Second,
it taught that an understanding of sickness required an understanding
of nature.
1.2.1.5 Ancient Alexandrian Medicine
Soon after the death of Aristotle (d. 322 BC) and his most
famous pupil, Alexander the Great (d. 323 BC), a great medical
school was founded in Egypt at the court of King Ptolemy, at his
capital, Alexandria, at the mouth of the Nile. The King’s main
cultural creations were the Alexandrian Library* and the Museum
(Sanctuary of the Muses), which installed Greek learning in a new
Egyptian environment — Archimedes, Euclid, and the astronomer
Ptolemy were soon to teach there. The Library became a wonder of
the scholarly world, eventually containing, it was said, 700,000
manuscripts, and other facilities including an observatory, zoological
gardens, lecture halls and rooms for research.
The two earliest teachers at the Alexandrian medical school were
also its greatest — Herophilus of Chalcedon (ca. 330-260 BC) and
his contemporary, Erasistratus of Chios (ca. 330-255 BC). Their
writings having been lost, we know about them only through later
physicians. Herophilus was the first to dissect cadavers in public.
He was a student of Praxagoras of Cos (fl. 340 BC), who had
improved Aristotelian anatomy by distinguishing arteries from veins,
but who saw the arteries as air tubes, similar to the trachea and
bronchi, a common error because arteries are devoid of blood in
corpses. Herophilus observed that the coats of arteries were much
thicker than those of the veins, thus he speculated that the arteries
were filled not with air but with blood. Herophilus wrote at least
eleven treatises, discovering and naming the prostate and the
duodenum (from the Greek for twelve fingers, the length of gut he
found). He also wrote on the pulse as a diagnostic guide and on
therapeutics, ophthalmology, dietetics, and midwifery. He recognized
the brain as the central organ of the nervous system and the seat of
intelligence, extending the knowledge of the parts of the brain, certain
of which still bear titles translated from those given by him. He was
the first to grasp the nature of the nerves, which he distinguished as
motor and sensory, though he did not separate them clearly from
tendons. Erasistratus surmised that every organ is formed of a threefold system of “vessels” — veins, arteries, and nerves, dividing
indefinitely. These, plaited together, were postulated to make up
the tissues. In the brain, Erasistratus observed convolutions, noting
that they were more elaborate in man than in animals and associating
this with higher intelligence. He distinguished between cerebrum
and cerebellum, and is often regarded as an early mechanist because
of his model of bodily processes — for instance, digestion involved
the stomach grinding food. He was opposed to intrusive remedies
such as venesection, and his favorite therapeutic measures were
regulated exercise, diet, and the vapor bath — very much in the
Hippocratic tradition.
1.2.1.6 Ancient Roman Medicine
Roman tradition held that one was better off without doctors.
According to Cato (234-149 BC), citizens had no need of professional
physicians because Romans were hale and hearty, unlike the effete
Greeks. Apparently Romans enjoyed bad-mouthing Greek physicians.
Thus the Romans despised medicine as a profession but this did
not prevent them from making use of Greek physicians or even of
the services of their own slaves. Galen of Pergamum (130-200 AD)
tells us that in his time, large cities such as Rome and Alexandria swarmed
with specialists who also travelled about from place to place.
Martial (40-104 AD) mentions some of them in an epigram:
“Cascellius extracts and repairs bad teeth; you, Hyginus, cauterize
ingrowing eyelashes; Fannius cures a relaxed uvula without cutting;
Eros removes brand marks from slaves; Hermes is a very Podalirius
for ruptures.” Under the Empire, military medicine was highly
organized — every cohort had its surgeon, and surgeons of a higher
grade were attached to the legions as consultants. Army surgeons
ranked as noncombatants and enjoyed many privileges.
In the Roman empire, the earliest scientific teacher was a Greek,
Asclepiades of Bithynia (124-40 BC). Asclepiades ridiculed the
Hippocratic expectant attitude as a mere “meditation on death,”
and urged active measures that the cure might be “seemly, swift and
*Part of the Library was wrecked by fire in 48 BC during riots sparked by the arrival of Julius Caesar. Much later, Christian leaders encouraged the destruction of the Temple
of Muses. As legend has it, in 415 AD the last resident scholar, the female mathematician Hypatia, was hauled out of the Museum by Christian fanatics and beaten to death
(or her flesh was ripped off using clamshells, by another account). The 7th century Muslim conquest of the city resulted in the final destruction of the Library.
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 7
sure.” Though outside the mainstream, his medical practice is
interesting as a modification of the atomic or corpuscular theory,
according to which disease results from an irregular or inharmonious
motion of the corpuscles of the body. His pupils were numerous,
constituting the Methodical school, but his available therapeutic
tools were few — he trusted mainly to changes of diet, friction, bathing, exercise, and occasionally emetics, bleeding, and wine. He was
also the first to use music in the treatment of the insane.
Back in the mainstream, Galen of Pergamum (130-200 AD)
provided the final medical synthesis of antiquity and the effective
medical standard for the next 13 centuries. His first medical
appointment was as surgeon to the Roman gladiators. He later
traveled to Rome and wrote extensively on anatomy, physiology
and practical medicine. His fame is due in part to his prolific pen
— some 350 authentic titles ranging in topic from the soul to bloodletting polemics survive, about as much as all Greek medical writings
together. Galen was a flamboyant character. One of his party tricks,
revealing his genius for self-advertisement as well as experiment, was to
sever the nerves in the neck of a pig. As these were severed, one by
one, the pig continued to squeal; but when Galen cut one of the
laryngeal nerves the squealing stopped, impressing the crowd.
Galen justified venesection in terms of his elaborate pulse lore.
Written in the early 170s, his sixteen books on the pulse were
divided into four treatises, each four books long. In one of these
treatises, he explains how to take the pulse and to interpret it, raising
key questions, for example: How was it possible to tell whether a
pulse was full, rapid, or rhythmical? Such questions he resolved partly
from experience and partly by reference to earlier authorities. Galen
developed a characteristic physiological scheme that remained in
vogue until the 17th century. It supposes three types of so-called
spirits associated with three types of the activity of living things.
These were the natural spirits formed in the liver and distributed by
the veins, the vital spirits formed in the heart and distributed by the
arteries, and the animal spirits formed in the brain and distributed
by the nerves. Galen’s system was an admirable if factually flawed
working hypothesis, based on much experimental evidence, and he
presented his work as “perfecting” the legacy of Hippocrates.
As in Greece, medicine remained personal in Rome. No medical
degrees were conferred or qualifications required. In the absence of
colleges and universities, the private face-to-face nature of medical
instruction encouraged fluidity and diversity, Students attached
themselves to an individual teacher, sitting at his feet and
accompanying him on his rounds. Many different sorts of medical
care were available, and self-help was universal. Celsus’ On Medicine
was written for a non-professional readership as willing to wield the
scalpel as the plough. Disease explanations changed little. Public
authorities still ascribed famines and pestilences to the gods, and
Galen was silent on contagion. The essential trilogy of classical
medicine remained dietetics, exercise, and drugs, accompanied by
light surgery.
1.2.1.7 Medicine in the Middle Ages
The passage from the glorious days of Rome to the Middle Ages
was often violent, especially in the West, with wave after wave of
barbarian onslaughts from the East. These culminated in the sack
of the Eternal City by Alaric’s Goths in 410 AD, which
effectively ended the western empire and frayed the thread of learned
medicine. Thus Galen had no effective successor. Indeed, medieval
medicine may be summed up as a corrupted version of Galenism.
The true scientific tradition did not reappear in the West until the
16th century, after a lengthy incubation in the Islamic world. For
example, in England the Venerable Bede (ca. 672-735) and his monks
possessed many medical writings, and knowledge of plant remedies
was extensive, but the English healer used chants and charms,
predicated on the belief that certain diseases and bad luck were caused
by darts shot by elves, while other ailments involved a “great worm,”
a term applied to snakes, insects, and dragons.
By contrast with the naturalist focus of Hippocratic and
Galenic medicine, healing became more authoritarian and intertwined
with religion, for the rising Church taught that there was a supernatural plan and purpose to everything, including sickness and death.
Christian and Jewish healing traditions became more prominent.
Disease could be cured by prayers or by invoking the names of saints,
by exorcism, by amulets or number magic, or by transferring the
sickness to animals, plants, or to the soil. Certain maladies such as
leprosy were associated with the Almighty’s punishments for sin,
according to the Book of Leviticus:
“When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising [a swelling], a
scab, or bright spot, and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague [the
spots] of leprosy...and the plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his
flesh it is a plague of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and
pronounce him unclean.”
Such polluting diseases were curable by the Lord alone,
encouraging some Jewish people to reject human medicine in favor
of the divine, citing the fate of King Asa (ca. 914-874 BC), who
“sought not the Lord, but his physicians,” and whose foot sores
consequently worsened, and he died. On the other hand, while Jewish
dietary rituals (e.g. kosher food) are principally expressions of religious
precepts about pollution and purification, a useful practical effect is
to limit exposure to foodborne diseases such as trichinosis.2215
Many of the distinguished surgeons of the Middle Ages were
clerics, but the practice of medicine and surgery by members of the
Church was not favored by the hierarchy. Many laws were passed
against the practice of medicine for worldly profit. In 1215 the
Fourth Lateran Council forbade all sub-deacons, deacons, or priests
to practice that part of surgery that had to do with burning and
cutting. Finally, Pope Honorius III (d. 1216) prohibited all persons
in holy orders from practicing medicine in any form, which meant
that the educated classes were prohibited from performing any type
of surgery.
In Europe in the Middle Ages, practitioners unsuccessfully sought
to cure wounds by treating only the weapons that caused them,
using an ointment on the offending knife or sword known as a
weapon salve. Physicians practiced urine-gazing (uroscopy), but
proper chemical analysis of urine did not develop until the 18th
century. Medieval medicine is the source of many humorous
“remedies” in contemporary diatribes against modern medicine — such
as being strapped into a halter and walked around a pigsty three
times for mumps, drinking water from the skull of a bishop to treat
rheumatism, or nuzzling a mouse to cure the common cold.2216
But we must recognize that such treatments were not put forth as
reasonable science. Rather, they serve as a reminder of the results of
injecting mystical or religious elements into medicine as a substitute
for good science.
The Middle Ages are also remarkable for their plagues, which
became more numerous as people crowded closer and closer
together in urban centers of increasing population density. Plague
records from China during this period often show 50%-70%
mortality rates, and China probably served as the original source of
the greatest of the bubonic plagues that swept through Europe in
the 14th century, known as the Black Death. The disease broke out
in 1346 among the armies of a Mongol prince who laid siege to the
8 Nanomedicine • Volume I
trading city of Caffa in the Crimea. This compelled his withdrawal,
but not before the disease had entered Caffa, whence it rapidly spread
by ship throughout the Mediterranean.
The initial shock in 1346-1350 was severe. Die-offs varied widely,
with some small communities experiencing total extinction and
others, such as Milan, being spared entirely. The lethal effect of the
plague may have been enhanced by the fact that it was
propagated not solely by the bites of fleas carried on infected
rodents, but also was transmitted person to person as a result of
inhaling bacillus-filled droplets that had been coughed or sneezed
into the air by an infected individual. Lung infections of this kind
were observed to be 100% lethal in Manchuria in 1921, the only
time modern medicine has directly observed airborne plague
communication, so it is tempting to assume a similar mortality for
pneumonic plague in 14th century Europe. Mortality rates for
sufferers from bubonic infection transmitted by flea bite varies from
30% to 90%. All told, the best estimate of European plagueinduced mortality is that about one-third of the population died
during the initial five-year period.
The plague returned in the 1360s, the 1370s, and thereafter,
and European population declined irregularly as a result, reaching a
low point in England sometime between 1440-1480.2210 People
learned to minimize infection risk via quarantine, a practice which
stemmed from Biblical passages prescribing the ostracism of lepers.
Plague sufferers were treated as though they were temporary lepers,
with a standard 40-day quarantine for people and incoming ships
at all major ports. However, since the role of fleas and rats in disease
propagation remained unknown until the end of the 19th century,
quarantine measures were often ineffectual. Through the 17th
century, occasional plague outbreaks that carried off up to a third
or a half of a city’s population in a single year were considered
normal.2211 For example, Venetian statistics show that in 1575-77
and again in 1630-31, a third or more of the city’s population died
of plague.2212
Pre-modern medicine was powerless against bubonic plague.
Before antibiotics reduced the disease to triviality in 1943, the average
mortality rate was 60%-70% of those affected, despite all that the
best hospital care could accomplish.2213 The last recorded outbreak
of plague that ran its course without benefit of penicillin and
related antibiotics (which destroy the infection rapidly) occurred in
Burma in 1947, with 78% lethality.2214
1.2.1.8 Renaissance and Pre-Modern Medicine
While internal medicine languished through the Middle Ages,
the surgeons of the Renaissance gained wide experience during the
many religious wars of the period. They had many new problems to
face, including the treatment of wounds caused by firearms. The
French had employed gunpowder at the siege of Puiguillaume in
1338, and cannon were used by the English at the Battle of Crecy
in 1346. Gunshot wounds at that time were caused by large missiles
of low velocity that caused ragged wounds and carried pieces of
clothing into the tissues. These wounds were severe and very liable
to become septic. The universal belief among contemporary surgeons
was that gunpowder itself was venomous. To neutralize the effect of
this venom, the general practice was to cauterize the wound by
injecting boiling oil.
The first man to break away from this old doctrine was Ambroise
Pare (1510-90). Pare came to Paris in 1532 as an apprentice to a
barber-surgeon and then moved to the great Hotel Dieu as resident
surgeon. In that immense medieval hospital, the only one in Paris
at the time, he gained great experience, and in 1536 he began his
career as a military surgeon. As described in his book The Apologie
and Treatise, he recounts how, during his first campaign as a greenhorn
military surgeon in Turin in 1537, he had run out of boiling oil, the
established treatment for gunpowder wounds, just after French
troops had captured the castle of Villaine. So in place of boiling oil,
he applied:
“...a digestive of yolk of eggs, oil of roses, and turpentine. In the night I
could not sleep in quiet, fearing some default in not cauterizing, that I
should find those to whom I had not used the burning oil dead
impoisoned; which made me rise very early to visit them, where beyond
my expectation I found those to whom I had applied my digestive medicine,
to feel little pain, and their wounds without inflammation or tumour,
having rested reasonable well in the night; the other to whom was used
the said burning oil, I found them feverish with great pain and tumour
about the edges of their wounds. And then I resolved with myself never
so cruelly to burn poor men wounded with gunshot.”
Pare also went on to show that bleeding after amputations should
be arrested, not by the terrible method of the indiscriminate use of
the red-hot cautery, but by simple tying of the blood vessels. His
most famous phrase, so reminiscent of the old Hippocratic school
of thought, was: “I dressed the wound, and God healed him.”
In 1633 appeared the earliest book on first-aid for the injured,
by one Stephen Bradwell, although the proffered advice sounds
impractical and a bit odd to modern ears. For example, the treatment
for the “Biting of a Madde Dogge” is to throw the patient into
water. “In doing this, if he cannot swim, after he hath swallowed a
good quantity of water, take him out again. But if he be skilful in
swimming, hold him under the water a little while till he have taken
in some pretty quantity.” This procedure may not be wholly
irrational — standard 20th century first aid for dog bites includes a
thorough cleansing of the wound with water.
Venesection remained a popular 17th century universal remedy. As
described by the surgeon Richard Wiseman (1622-1676), “a
gentleman of about thirty years of age coming out of Hertfordshire
through Tottenham and riding upon the causeway near an inn, one
emptying a chamber pot out of the window as he was passing by,
his horse started and rushed violently between a signpost and a tree
which supported part of the sign. The poor gentleman was beaten
off his horse and lay stunned upon the ground.” A barber-surgeon
was hastily summoned but nothing much was done for the injured
man until Wiseman arrived, whereupon:
“I found the gentleman lying upon the ground, the people and chirurgeon
gazing upon him. I felt his pulse much oppressed, the right brow bruised
and inquired whether they had bled him blood. The chirurgeon replied
that he had opened a vein in his arm but it would not bleed. I replied,
we must make him bleed through it by splitting his veins. Turning his
head on one side, I saw the jugular vein on the bruised side turgid and
opened it. He bled freely. After I had taken about twelve ounces, the
blood ran down from his arm which had been opened before and would
not bleed. We bled him till he came to life, and then he raved and
struggled with us.”
The patient’s injuries were dressed and he was subjected to
further bleedings, but evidently made a good recovery.
Even by the 18th century, the traditional surgeon’s day-to-day
business eschewed high-risk operations like amputations; rather, it
was a round of minor procedures such as venesection, lancing boils,
dressing skin abrasions, pulling teeth, managing whitlows, trussing
ruptures, and treating skin ulcers. The fatality rates of these procedures
were low, for surgeons understood their limits, and the repertoire of
operations they attempted was small, because of the well-known
risks of trauma, blood loss, and sepsis. Internal disorders were treated
not by the knife but by medicines and management, since major
internal surgery was unthinkable before anesthetics and antiseptic
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 9
procedures. Improvements did occur in certain operations such as
lithotomy. William Cheselden (1688-1752), a great British surgeon
of the 18th century, perfected a technique which enabled him to
remove a stone in the bladder in one minute (his record time was
54 seconds), thus reducing mortality from about 50% to under 10%.
Cheselden’s results were not bettered until almost the end of the
19th century.
In the 17th century, internal medical treatment was frequently
overdone on those affluent enough to afford it. Critics often
denounced physicians as meddlesome, capriciously practicing an
often dangerous polypharmacy — a blunderbuss approach. The
deathbed of Charles II (1630-1685) of England was a conspicuous
case of such medical overkill; after the king had suffered a stroke,
his doctors moved in, and Sir Raymond Crawfurd (1865-1938)
recreated the scene:
“Sixteen ounces of blood were removed from a vein in his right arm
with immediate good effect. As was the approved practice at this time,
the King was allowed to remain in the chair in which the convulsions
seized him. His teeth were held forcibly open to prevent him biting his
tongue. The regimen was, as Roger North pithily describes it, first to get
him to wake, and then to keep him from sleeping. Urgent messages had
been dispatched to the King’s numerous personal physicians, who quickly
came flocking to his assistance; they were summoned regardless of
distinctions of creed and politics, and they came. They ordered cuppingglasses to be applied to his shoulders forthwith, and deep scarification to
be carried out, by which they succeeded in removing another eight ounces
of blood. A strong antimonial emetic was administered, but as the King
could be got to swallow only a small portion of it, they determined to
render assistance doubly sure by a full dose of Sulphate of Zinc. Strong
purgatives were given, and supplemented by a succession of clysters. The
hair was shorn close, and pungent blistering agents were applied all
over his head. And as though this were not enough, the red-hot cautery
was requisitioned as well.”
One of the dozen attending physicians noted with pride that
“nothing was left untried”; the King graciously apologized for
being “an unconscionable time a-dying.”
Meanwhile, the common citizen experienced poor health
exacerbated by the many new dangers attending the Industrial
Revolution. In 1775, Percivall Pott (1714-1788) pointed out that
boy chimneysweeps developed scrotal cancer, due to soot irritation.
In his Condition of the Working Classes in England (1844), Friedrich
Engels (1820-1895), a Manchester factory owner as well as Karl
Marx’s collaborator, described workers who were “pale, lank, narrowchested, hollow-eyed ghosts,” cooped up in houses that were mere
“kennels to sleep and die in.” In 1832, the Leeds physician Charles
Turner Thackrah (1795-1833) published The Effects of Arts, Trades,
and Professions on Health and Longevity, documenting the diseases
and disabilities of various occupations. Apart from factory workers,
among those most exposed to harmful substances were cornmillers,
maltsters, coffee-roasters, snuff-makers, rag-pickers, papermakers and
feather-dressers. Tailors were so subject to anal fistulas that they set
up their own “fistula clubs.” Thackrah’s overall verdict was bleak:
“Not 10% of the inhabitants of large towns enjoy full health.”
The single worst malady cultivated in populous cities was
tuberculosis (TB), a disease characterized by fever, night sweats, and
hemoptysis (coughing up blood), called “consumption” because
victims were almost literally consumed. By 1800 TB was proclaimed
the most common disease, and in 1815 Thomas Young (1773-1829)
surmised that tuberculosis brought a premature death to one in four
in the general population. Autopsies conducted in the chief Paris
hospitals recorded TB as the cause of death in some 40% of cases.
In the continental U.S. as late as 1890, the corresponding percentage
was about 13%, and tuberculosis was still the leading cause of death
(Table 1.2), though the data are partially suspect because cases of
lung cancer were sometimes reported as “consumption”.2226
One important 18th century improvement in internal medicine
which decisively saved many lives was the introduction of inoculation
and vaccination against smallpox. Smallpox, “the speckled monster,”
had become virulent throughout Europe and in bad years accounted
for about 10% of all deaths; Queen Mary of England (1662-1694),
Louis XV of France (1710-1774), and Queen Anne’s son and sole
surviving direct heir (d. 1700) died of it. Doctors had long been
aware of the immunizing properties of an attack, and smallpox
inoculation seems to have been known and practiced for centuries
at a folk level throughout Arabia, North Africa, Persia, and India.
Reports of a more elaborate Chinese method, involving the insertion
of a suitable infected swab of cotton inside the patient’s nostril,
reached London in 1700. But it was a report from Mary Wortley
Montagu (1689-1762), wife of the British consul in Constantinople,
that Turkish women held smallpox parties at which they routinely
performed inoculations with the aim to induce a mild dose so as to
confer lifelong protection without pockmarking, that hastened
acceptance in the rural medical community. The usual method was
to transfer the infection by introducing matter from a smallpox
pustule into a slight wound made in the patient’s skin. Occasionally
the patient developed a severe case of smallpox from such treatment,
and some died. But usually the symptoms were slight — a few score
of pox only — and immunity proved equivalent to that resulting
from contracting the disease naturally.
Edward Jenner (1749-1823), an English country doctor who
performed such inoculations, noticed that cowpox, a cattle disease
occasionally contracted by humans, particularly dairy maids, also
conferred immunity against smallpox. Suspecting that it might be
possible to produce this immunity by arm-to-arm inoculation from
Table 1.2. Leading Causes of Death in the United States,
1890 vs. 1990
(crude annual death rate per 100,000 of population)2208,2209
1890 1990
Death Rate Death Rate
Cause of Death per 100,000 per 100,000
Consumption (TB) 245.4 0.7
Pneumonia 186.9 31.1
Heart disease 121.8 310.4
Diarrheal diseases 104.1 ~ 0
Debility and atrophy 88.6 N/A
Infantile cholera 79.7 ~ 0
Bronchitis 74.4 1.7
Diphtheria 70.1 ~ 0
Kidney diseases 59.7 8.8
Meningitis 49.1 0.4
Apoplexy (stroke) 49.0 57.9
Cancer 47.9 203.2
Typhoid Fever 46.3 ~ 0
Old age 44.9 N/A
Brain diseases 30.9 N/A
Croup 27.6 ~ 0
Malaria 19.2 0.002
Influenza 6.2 0.8
Other ~ 488.2 248.8
All Causes ~ 1840.0 863.8
10 Nanomedicine • Volume I
the cowpox pustule, and surmising it would be safer than inoculation
from smallpox pustules directly, since in humans cowpox was benign,
Jenner tried the experiment, and it worked. In 1798 he published
his discovery in An Inquiry into the Causes and Effects of the Variolae
Vaccinae. By 1799 over 5000 individuals had been vaccinated in
England and abroad the practice was taken up remarkably swiftly,
being made compulsory in Sweden and supported by Napoleon,
who had his army vaccinated. For the first time in history, organized
medicine began to contribute to human population growth in a
statistically significant fashion.
The Napoleonic Wars spurred new attempts to treat battlewounded soldiers in a more timely manner. Traditionally, the
wounded were left on the field unattended until the end of battle,
but Napoleon’s chief surgeon Dominique Jean Larrey (1766-1842)
introduced the use of rudimentary carts called ambulances volantes
(little more than horsedrawn rickshaws) as the first “ambulances” to
evacuate and transport wounded soldiers from the field to nearby
aid stations, even while the battle raged on. In 1792, Larrey organized
the first air evacuation, by hot air balloon.
The use of ambulances didn’t catch on until the late 1800s; until
then, anyone injured in the streets of Paris, London, New York or
Boston depended on the kindness of strangers or a nearby business
shop for a place to rest until a doctor could be summoned.2287 The
first “modern” ambulance appeared in the city of Cincinnati in 1865,
but the first true city ambulance system was developed in association
with Bellevue Hospital in New York City in 1866, receiving 1500
requests for transport in its first three years of service.2294 These
horse-drawn ambulances, usually provided by local mortuaries, carried
a driver and a surgeon, who was on board mainly to pronounce a
patient’s death at the scene or upon arrival at the hospital, since
little could be done for the seriously injured.2287 The surgeon kept
meticulous notes on the ride, recording the time of the call, transport
and arrival times, and any other details that “a coroner’s jury might
possibly require”.2294
The period also saw the development of many simple diagnostic
tools that are taken for granted today. For example, a French physician,
Rene Theophile Hyacinthe Laennec (1781-1826), in his Treatise
On Mediate Auscultation (1819), described pathological lesions found
in the chest at autopsy and showed how they correlated with disease
detected in living patients, establishing for the first time the modern
concept of clinicopathological correlation, the cornerstone of modern
diagnosis. Laennec also developed an instrument that he named a
“stethoscope” to assist him in his examination of patients, especially
female patients, against whose chests the direct placing of a male
ear was socially taboo. The original device was a straight wooden
tube; by mid-century rubber tubing was introduced to create a flexible
monaural stethoscope, and in 1852 an American physician, George
P. Cammann (1804-1863), devised our familiar two-ear instrument.
The clinical thermometer is of like vintage. Galileo (1564-1642)
invented the first thermometer in the late 16th century, but it was
not applied to medicine. Early medical thermometers in the 18th
century were a foot long and difficult to use at the bedside, and
were reportedly carried under the arm “as one might carry a gun.”
The short clinical thermometer was devised by Sir Clifford Allbutt
(1836-1925) in the 1860s, and was widely used during the American
Civil War (1861-1865). The classical work in temperature diagnostics
was Carl Wunderlich’s (1815-1877) The Temperature in Diseases,
published in 1868, which presented data on nearly 25,000 patients
and analyzed temperature variations in 32 diseases, showing that
temperature readings could differentiate fevers. Other devices
emerged later to measure pulse and blood pressure. In 1854, Karl
Vierordt (1818-1884) created the sphygmograph, a pulse recorder
usable for routine monitoring on humans. Blood pressure was
measured using the familiar inflatable band wrapped around the
upper arm, called the sphygmomanometer, whose basic design was
established in 1896 by Scipione Riva-Rocci (1863-1937). The
hypodermic syringe was invented in 1853.
Biochemistry also began to play an increasing diagnostic
function. In the 18th century, Matthew Dobson (d. 1784) developed
tests for diabetes. In 1827, Richard Bright (1789-1858) showed
show the kidney complaint subsequently called Bright’s disease could
be diagnosed by a single, simple chemical test. Chemical analysis
was crucial to Alfred Becquerel’s (1814-1862) urinalysis studies in
1841, establishing the average amounts of water, urea, uric acid,
lactic acid, albumin, and inorganic salts secreted over 24 hours, and
correlating these with various disease conditions. In 1859, Alfred
Garrod (1819-1907) devised a simple chemical test pathognomonic
for gout.
1.2.1.9 Fully Invasive Surgery
The fully invasive surgery of the 19th and 20th centuries rests
upon the triple foundation of anatomy, anesthesia, and asepsis. Each
has an interesting story, described below, presaging the emergence
of the rational-scientific approach to medical treatment.
1.2.1.9.1 Anatomy
In surgical practice, lack of accurate anatomical knowledge had
long been a great obstacle. Dissection of the human body was first
practiced systematically at the great medical school of Alexandria,
which flourished from about 300 BC until the death of the last
ruler of Ptolemaic Egypt, Cleopatra, in 30 BC. After the decline of
Alexandria, dissection was carried on at a few other centers in the
Middle East, but in the first two centuries of the Christian era human
bodies were replaced on the dissection table by those of apes and
other animals. The anatomical knowledge gained by Galen and others
from the dissection of animals was an adequate guide for the simple
operative procedures carried out at this time because the abdomen,
the chest, and the head were rarely opened by the surgeon’s knife.
Anatomical demonstrations of a kind were introduced into some
Italian medical schools early in the 14th century but their main
purpose was to serve as an aid in memorizing what Galen had written a
thousand years before. During the late Middle Ages, and for a long
time after, the procedure was for the professor to read from some
second- or third-hand manuscript version of Galen while a demonstrator pointed to the part under discussion with a wand. As the
text of Galen was often based on the dissection of an ape or pig,
there were naturally many occasions when the anatomical
structure under examination did not correspond with Galen’s
description.
Some of the great artists took up the scientific study of anatomy,
but the true founder of modern anatomy was Andreas Vesalius
(1514-1564), a native of Brussels who studied medicine in Paris
and later taught surgery and anatomy at Padua and Bologna. Vesalius
was filled with a passionate desire for anatomical study, and many
stories are told of the great risks which he took in obtaining material,
including, it is reported, graverobbing. On one occasion he stole
the skeleton of a criminal which was hanging on a gallows outside
the city wall of Louvain and the trophy proved of great value in his
studies. His public dissections during his seven years in Padua drew
enormous crowds of students. In 1543 he published his 355-page
great work, De Humani Corporis Fabrica Libri Septem (On the Fabric of
the Human Body), the outstanding and precise illustrations in which
were copied and plagiarized by scholars for more than 100 years,
and could be used for teaching even today. For the first time in the
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 11
history of medicine, doctors had at their disposal a detailed and
accurate anatomical text with illustrations from the hand of a great
artist. This book is the foundation stone of anatomy — indeed of
all modern medicine — because without a sound knowledge of the
structure of the body there can be no real understanding of the
body’s functions in health and disease.
A tremendous shortage of dead human bodies for dissection, to
teach anatomy, remained a problem for centuries. In Edinburgh in
1827, an old man died in William Hare’s (1792-1870) boardinghouse; assisted by his lodger William Burke (1792-1829), the two
men bypassed the grave and sold the body directly to anatomists.
Spurred by success, they turned to murder, luring victims and
suffocating them to avoid signs of violence. Sixteen were done to
death and their bodies sold, fetching 7 pounds apiece, before Burke
and Hare were brought to justice in 1829. Hare turned King’s
evidence and Burke was hanged. The last cadaver was found in the
dissecting room of a respected anatomist, Robert Knox (1791-1862).
Despite his cries of innocence, an incensed crowd burned down his
house and he fled to London, his career in ruins, and eventually
Knox died in obscurity.
To help pass the English Anatomy Act of 1832 (which awarded
to doctors the “unclaimed bodies” of paupers) and to dispel public
concern about dissection, the body of the great English philosopher
and jurist, Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832), in accordance with his
directions, was dissected in the presence of his friends. The skeleton
was then reconstructed, supplied with a wax head to replace the
original (which had been mummified), dressed in Bentham’s own
clothes and set upright in a glass-fronted case. Both this effigy and
the head are preserved at University College, London, to this day.
1.2.1.9.2 Anesthesia
Pain did not prevent surgery but made it almost unbearable,
and the accompanying trauma often proved dangerous. Before the
anesthetic era, which commenced in the late 1840s, surgical operations
were agonizing. Of course, if the patient had a broken leg or a
major wound, there was no choice but submit to a surgeon’s knife.
But non-emergency elective operations would only be undergone if
the condition itself was so painful or life-threatening that the victim
could even consider allowing surgery. In this event, patients would
choose a surgeon with the best reputation for quickness — a limb
might be removed or a bladder stone evacuated in a couple of minutes.
Progress in technique was often rapid. For example, in 1824, Astley
Cooper (1768-1841) took 20 minutes to amputate a leg through
the hip joint; ten years later, James Syme (1799-1870) was doing it
in just 90 seconds.
In pre-anesthetic days, operations were rushed through at
lightning speed and under conditions of appalling difficulty. The
most hardened surgeons had to steel themselves to perform operations
which they knew would cause agony to their patients and nervewracking distress to themselves. It is hard for any 20th century
inhabitant of an industrialized nation to imagine what a major
surgical operation must have meant to the patient in the days before
anesthesia. The following is a personal account by a male patient
who suffered the removal of a stone from the bladder by Henry
Cline (1750-1827), surgeon to St. Thomas’s Hospital and one of
the leading operators of the day, on 30 December 1811, just three
decades before the widespread adoption of anesthesia:
“My habit and constitution being good it required little preparation of
body, and my mind was made up. When all parties had arrived I
retired to my room for a minute, bent my knee in silent adoration and
submission, and returning to the surgeons conducted them to the apartment
in which the preparations had been made. The bandages &c. having
been adjusted I was prepared to receive a shock of pain of extreme violence
and so much had I overrated it, that the first incision did not even
make me wince although I had declared that it was not my intention to
restrain such impulse, convinced that such effort of restraint could only
lead to additional exhaustion. At subsequent moments, therefore I did
cry out under the pain, but was allowed to have gone through the
operation with great firmness.”
“The forcing up of the staff prior to the introduction of the gorget gave
me the first real pain, but this instantly subsided after the incision of
the bladder was made, the rush of urine appeared to relieve it and
soothe the wound.”
“When the forceps was introduced the pain was again very considerable
and every movement of the instrument in endeavoring to find the stone
increased. Still, however, my mind was firm and confident, and,
although anxious, I was yet alive to what was going on. After several
ineffectual attempts to grasp the stone I heard the operator say in the
lowest whisper, “It is a little awkward, it lies under my hand. Give me
the curved forceps,” upon which he withdrew the others. Here, I think,
I asked if there was anything wrong — or something to that purport —
and was reanimated by the reply conveyed in the kindest manner, “Be
patient, Sir, it will soon be over.” When the other forceps was introduced I
had again to undergo the searching for the stone and heard Mr. Cline
say, “I have got it.” I had probably by this time conceived that the worst
was over; but when the necessary force was applied to withdraw the
stone the sensation was such as I cannot find words to describe. In addition
to the positive pain there was something peculiar in the feel. The bladder
embraced the stone as firmly as the stone was itself grasped by the forceps; it
seemed as if the whole organ was about to be torn out. The duration,
however, of this really trying part of the operation was short and when
the words “Now, Sir, it is all over” struck my ear, the ejaculation of
“Thank God! Thank God!” was uttered with a fervency and fulness of
heart which can only be conceived....I never heard what was the precise
duration of the operation but conceive it to have been between twelve
and fifteen minutes.”
And now, a woman’s point of view. In 1810, Napoleon’s famed
military doctor Dominique Jean Larrey performed a radical
mastectomy without anesthetic on the popular female novelist Fanny
Burney (1752-1840). Burney later wrote a long account of the
operation which, despite the excruciating agony, she believed had
nevertheless saved her life:
“M. Dubois placed me upon the Mattress, & spread a cambric
handkerchief upon my face. It was transparent, however, & I saw through
it that the Bed stead was instantly surrounded by the 7 men and my
nurse. I refused to be held; but when, bright through the cambric, I saw
the glitter of polished steel — I closed my eyes...
“Yet — when the dreadful steel was plunged into the breast — cutting
through veins — arteries — flesh — nerves — I needed no injunctions
not to restrain my cries. I began a scream that lasted unintermittingly
during the whole time of the incision — & I almost marvel that it
rings not in my Ears still! so excruciating was the agony.
“When the wound was made, & the instrument was withdrawn, the
pain seemed undiminished, for the air that suddenly rushed into those
delicate parts felt like a mass of minute but sharp & forked poniards
[small pointed daggers], that were tearing at the edges of the wound.
But when again I felt the instrument, describing a curve, cutting against
the grain, if I may so say, while the flesh resisted in a manner so forcible
as to oppose & tire the hand of the operator, who was forced to change
from the right to the left — then, indeed, I thought I must have
expired, I attempted no more to open my eyes....The instrument the
second time withdrawn, I concluded the operation over — Oh no! presently
the terrible cutting was renewed — & worse than ever, to separate the
bottom, the foundation of the dreadful gland from the parts to which it
adhered...yet again all was not over....”
12 Nanomedicine • Volume I
This chilling account continued for several more pages.
When did the practice of anesthesia begin? The Herbal of
Dioscorides (ca. 40-90 AD) contains specific directions for giving a
decoction (boiled extraction) of mandragora “to such as shall be cut
or cauterized,” one of the earliest references to surgical anesthesia.
Bernard de Gordon (ca. 1260-1308) tells us that the Salernitans
rubbed up poppy seed and henbane and used them as a plaster to
deaden the sensibility of a part to be cauterized. Arnold of Villanova
(1235-1311) gives the following recipe:
“To produce sleep so profound that the patient may be cut and will feel
nothing, as though he were dead, take of opium, mandragora bark, and
henbane root equal parts, pound them together and mix with water.
When you want to sew or cut a man, dip a rag in this and put it to his
forehead and nostrils. He will soon sleep so deeply that you may do what
you will. To wake him up, dip the rag in strong vinegar.”
Some of the surgical textbooks of the Middle Ages contain
references to anesthetic sponges which were prepared by soaking
them in various herbs reputed to have soporific properties. The
favorite herb for this purpose was the mandrake. Another simple
method of producing analgesia used intermittently from early times
was compression. Writing in 1564 about the various uses of the
tourniquet, the French surgeon Ambrose Pare noted that “it much
dulls the sense of the part by stupefying it.” Amusingly, reliable
witnesses claim that as late as the 19th century, a method of anesthesia
practiced at the Imperial Court of China was to “knock the patient
out by a sudden blow on the jaw.”
The almost complete absence of any mention of pain-relieving
drugs in medical literature of the post-medieval period is not easy
to explain. It is, however, probable that the action of crude concoctions
employed in early times was very uncertain, and that drugged sleep
often ended in death. The active ingredients of the many herbs used
in medicine had not been isolated and it would have been very
difficult to regulate dosages reliably.
The story of inhalation anesthesia begins in 1799 when Sir
Humphry Davy (1778-1829) recorded the effects produced by the
inhalation of nitrous oxide. He breathed various concentrations of
the gas and noted that a headache and the pain associated with the
cutting of a wisdom tooth were relieved. Demonstrations of the
effects of nitrous oxide were frequently given, bladders filled with
“laughing gas” being passed around at lectures. Gas inhalation
became a popular party game. A little book of 1839 contains a
description of the “irresistibly ridiculous” sight of a large room filled
with persons each of whom was sucking from a bladder. As the gas
began to take effect, “some jumped over the tables and chairs; some
were bent on making speeches; some were very much inclined to
fight; and one young gentleman persisted in attempting to kiss the
ladies.” At about the same time, “ether frolics” became equally popular.
In January 1842, William E. Clarke (b. 1818), a young American
physician of Rochester, New York, who had acquired some knowledge
of ether by attendance at ether frolics, administered the chemical
on a towel to a Miss Hobbie who then had one of her teeth
extracted painlessly. So far as is known this was the first use of ether
for a dental or surgical operation. In March 1842, Crawford W.
Long (1815-1878) of Danielville, Georgia, who had also witnessed
ether frolics “enjoying sweet kisses from the girls,” successfully
removed a small tumor from the neck of a patient under the influence
of ether. Horace Wells (1815-1848), a dentist of Hartford,
Connecticut, attended a public demonstration of the effects of
nitrous oxide in December 1844, and the day after he administered
the gas to himself and had one of his own teeth pulled out by a
colleague. Afterwards, Wells wrote: “I didn’t feel it so much as the
prick of a pin.” His former partner, William Thomas Green Morton
(1819-1868), also introduced ether into his dental practice in 1846.
By February 1847, the Lancet and other medical journals were
reporting anesthetic operations from all parts of Great Britain, and
ether had been used in most European countries. In June 1847 the
news reached South Africa and a leg was amputated painlessly by
W.G. Atherstone of Grahamstown.
Sir James Young Simpson (1811-1870), professor of surgery at
Edinburgh, introduced chloroform in 1847. Tradition has it that
Simpson had been testing chemicals with his assistants when
somebody upset a bottle of chloroform; upon bringing in dinner,
Simpson’s wife found them all asleep. Unlike ether, chloroform did
not irritate the lungs or cause vomiting, and was powerful and easy
to administer. In April 1853, Queen Victoria (1819-1901) took
chloroform for the birth of Prince Leopold; John Snow (1813-1858)
administered the anesthetic. Protests followed — some objections
were religious (e.g., the Bible taught that women were supposed to
bring forth in “travail and pain”*) but most were medical, putatively on
grounds of safety but ringing with naturophilia (Section 1.3.4): “In
no case could it be justifiable to administer chloroform in perfectly
ordinary labor,” complained the Lancet. Incredibly, some early 19th
century surgeons believed that using anesthesia for an operation
would weaken a patient’s character.
Of course, general anesthesia could indeed prove dangerous, and
deep unconsciousness was unnecessary for less invasive procedures, so
the search was on for substances that would numb a particular area
for local surgery. Cocaine was isolated in 1859 and was first used in
ophthalmologic procedures by Carl Koller (1857-1944). Cocaine
became the first widely-used local anesthetic, synthesized in 1885
by the Merck drug company.
1.2.1.9.3 Germ Theory and Antisepsis
By the middle of the 19th century, pain had been banished from
surgical operations, but one grave danger still faced every
patient submitting himself to the surgeon’s knife. This was the everpresent risk of sepsis (infection). Hospital diseases such as erysipelas,
pyemia, septicemia and gangrene, were rife. In the 1850s the death
rate after amputations varied from 25%-60% in different countries
and in military practice it reached the appalling figure of 75%-90%.
The first ovariotomies, which were the first abdominal operations
performed on a fairly large scale, had a mortality rate of more than
30% even in the most expert hands. That all these diseases were due
to some form of “contagion” had long been suspected, but the general
view was that whatever agent was responsible was generated
spontaneously in wounds. Alternatively, it was theorized that air
itself was responsible for suppuration and many attempts were made
to exclude the air from wounds by means of elaborate dressings.
Some medical men had postulated the existence of minute
particles in the air which carried contagion, the so-called “germ
theory.” In 1546, Girolamo Fracastoro of Verona (1478-1553)
proposed “seminaria, the seeds of disease which multiply rapidly
and propagate their life,” minute bodies passing unseen from the
infector to the infected by contact, by clothing or utensils, and by
infection at a distance through the air.
What made the germ theory of contagion so difficult to accept
was that no one could see the supposed microbes. Magnifying lenses
were used in ancient times, and by the beginning of the 17th century
*Others pointed to Genesis 2:21, where Adam is put to sleep as the rib is taken for Eve.
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 13
they had been combined in a tube to make the compound microscope. The first man to employ the microscope in investigating the
causes of diseases was probably Athanasius Kircher (1601-1680), a
learned Jesuit priest. In 1658 Kircher described experiments upon
the nature of putrefaction, showing how maggots and other living
creatures developed in decaying matter. He also claimed to have
found in the blood of plague-stricken patients “countless masses of
small worms, invisible to the naked eye.” It is impossible that he
could have seen the plague bacillus with the very low power microscopes at his disposal, but he may have seen some of the larger
microorganisms and his statements about the doctrine of contagion
are even more explicit than those of Fracastoro.
The great pioneer of modern microscopy was Anthoni van
Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723), a Dutch linen draper, who ground his
own lenses and made hundreds of microscopes. Few of his instruments
provided a magnification of more than 160X but he is generally
credited as making the first observations of germs, reported in his
communications to the Royal Society in London. Leeuwenhoek was
the first to describe spermatozoa and he gave the first complete
account of the red blood corpuscles in 1674; he also found that the
film from his own teeth contained “little animals, more numerous
than all the people in the Netherlands.”
In 1847, Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis (1818-1865), an assistant at
the Vienna General Hospital in the maternity clinic (the world’s
largest at the time), was investigating the 29% postpartum mortality
rate among women in Ward One, where births were handled by
medical students, vs. a 3% rate in Ward Two where births were
handled by midwifery pupils. Semmelweis noticed that the
appearances of these deaths from puerperal fever looked the same as
those observed in the body of an older colleague, forensic medicine
Professor Jakob Kolletschka (1803-1847), who had died from a
dissection wound suffered in the clinic. He correctly surmised that
the postpartum deaths were caused by infection from “putrid
particles” carried on the hands of medical students who often shuttled
back and forth between the labor wards, the obstetrical clinic, and
the autopsy room where dissections were performed. Semmelweis
instituted a simple routine of hand-washing with water solutions of
chloride of lime, which promptly reduced mortality to 1.27%.
Unfortunately, his ideas were met with fierce opposition by the
conservative medical community in Vienna, who subjected him to
laughter and ridicule. In disgust, Semmelweis left Austria for
Budapest. There he became head of the obstetrical division of
St. Rochus Hospital, where puerperal fever mortality rates were
reduced to below 1% after Semmelweis introduced chlorinated water
disinfection.
The man who elucidated the true nature of infection, founded
the science of bacteriology, and paved the way for Lister and the
antiseptic system in surgery was Louis Pasteur (1822-1895). Pasteur
was led to his great discoveries regarding bacteria and other microorganisms by his investigations into the process of fermentation.
He showed conclusively that fermentation was brought about by
some external agent entering the wine. He proved by painstaking
experiments under rigorously controlled conditions that meat and
fluids like blood did not putrefy if they were kept in such a way that
all air was excluded from them. By taking samples of air at different
levels Pasteur showed that contamination became less with increasing
altitude. Then he proved that the contaminating agents were living
organisms (bacteria) which were everywhere — in every room, in
the air, on every article of clothing, on furniture, on the ground,
and on the skin. He showed that putrefaction was caused by the
presence of bacteria and that this applied to putrefaction in foods
(milk, wine, and meat), urine, and in wounds.
The application of Pasteur’s discoveries to surgical practice was
the work of Joseph Lister (1827-1912), a young English surgeon
who had concluded that it must also be bacteria that caused the
suppuration, pus and gangrene which plagued the surgical wards of
those days. He determined to prevent the access of organisms by
killing them in or on the surface of the wound. Pasteur had shown
that heat could kill microbes, but it was impossible to apply heat to
a wound without burning the patient, so some chemical substance
had to be found. After trying various chemical agents he finally
selected carbolic acid, and he insisted that everything which touched
the wound, the dressings, the instruments and the fingers, should
be treated with this antiseptic. He even produced an antiseptic
atmosphere by means of a carbolic spray. The clinical results of Lister’s
first antiseptic system in 1865 included 11 compound fracture cases
with only one death, a 9% mortality rate, marking a watershed
between the primitive and modern eras of surgery.
Throughout the 19th century, the arguments continued as to
whether microorganisms seen in a sick patient were merely
coincidental with the illness, or resulted from the changes brought
about by the illness itself. In 1882 the German microbiologist
Robert Koch (1843-1910) formulated three famous postulates to
guide scientists searching for disease-causing microbes. Koch argued
that to prove an organism causes a disease, microbiologists must
show that the organism occurs in every case of the disease; that it is
never found as a harmless parasite associated with another disease;
and that once the organism is isolated from the body and grown in
laboratory culture, it can be introduced into a new host and produce
the disease again. (An oft-stated fourth postulate, that the microbe
must be isolated again from the second host, was not part of Koch’s
original formulation.2202)* Koch and his pupils discovered specific
bacillary causes for various diseases, including anthrax, cholera,
tuberculosis, gonorrhea, diphtheria, leprosy, typhoid, trypanosomiasis,
and malaria.
The theory that specific germs could cause specific disease
remained contentious until the beginning of the 20th century. Many
scientists of great repute rejected Koch’s conclusions, with one
scientist confidently asserting that “no microbe found in the living
blood of any animal was pathogenic.” In one celebrated case, Max
von Pettenkofer of Bavaria (1818-1901), a distinguished 19th century
experimental hygienist, induced Koch to send him a sample of his
cholera vibrios culture and then wrote a letter back to Koch in 1892,
as follows:
“Herr Doctor Pettenkofer presents his compliments to Herr Doctor
Professor Koch and thanks him for the flask containing the so-called
cholera vibrios, which he was kind enough to send. Herr Doctor
Pettenkofer has now drunk the entire contents and is happy to be able to
inform Herr Doctor Professor Koch that he remains in his usual good
health.”
Apparently Pettenkofer, aged 74 at the time he wrote the letter,
survived this cholera exposure quite well, perhaps possessing the
high stomach acidity which sometimes neutralizes the bacillus,
though he shot himself to death in Munich 9 years later.
Skeptics notwithstanding, microbes were key. Enormous new
vistas now lay open, as surgeons could confidently make an incision
through intact skin without incurring an extreme risk of wound
infection. The next step was to progress beyond killing wound
*Koch’s postulates are still valuable, especially as ideals, but many diseases do not conform to them so they are no longer considered the essential basis of diagnosis that
they once were.2202
14 Nanomedicine • Volume I
bacteria with chemical antiseptics, to the prevention of bacterial
contamination by eliminating bacteria in the operating theater —
aseptic surgery. The use of steam sterilization of instruments, dressings
and gowns, the wearing of masks, caps and gloves, air filtration and
the other rituals of the operating theater of today were introduced
over the decades following Lister’s efforts.
Anesthesia and antisepsis enabled surgeons to carry out
procedures that had formerly been quite beyond them, including
long operations inside the head, the abdomen and the pelvis.
Theodor Billroth of Vienna (1829-1894) resected the esophagus in
1872, parts of the intestines in 1878, and the pyloric end of the
stomach in 1881. Billroth also made the first complete excision of
the larynx. The first successful repair of a gunshot wound on a major
artery was performed in Chicago by John B. Murphy (1857-1916)
in 1897; Ludwig Rehn (1849-1930) of Frankfurt am Main
performed the first successful repair of a cardiac injury in Germany
in the same year.
Writing in 1874, Sir John Eric Erichsen (1818-1896), Professor of
Surgery at University College, London, had predicted that “the
abdomen, the chest, and the brain would be forever shut from the
intrusions of the wise and humane surgeon.” By the time of Erichsen’s
death 22 years later, surgeons had successfully removed from
patients the stomach and large parts of the intestines, a whole lung
had been excised, and a brain tumor had been extirpated. These
operations were not mere feats of surgical showmanship; they saved
the lives and restored the health of thousands of human beings.
1.2.1.10 Cells and Tissues
The doctrine of the essential cellular nature of living things was
established by 1840. Modern cell theory3223 began in botany. The
Jena botanist Matthias Schleiden (1804-1881) observed that plants
were aggregates of cells, existing as self-reproducing living units.
Exploring analogies between animals and plants in structure and growth,
Theodor Schwann (1810-1882) took up the idea, maintaining that all
these phenomena could also be demonstrated in animal structures. Thus
living cells were basic to living things, and cells incorporated a
nucleus and an outer membrane.
Jacob Henle (1809-85) applied cell biology to man. His threevolume Handbuch der systematischem Anatomie des Menschen
(Handbook of Systematic Human Anatomy) (1866-1871) addressed
the body from an architectural standpoint, describing its macroand microscopic structure. Henle discovered kidney tubules and
was the first to describe the muscular coat of the arteries, the minute
anatomy of the eye and various skin structures, earning him a
reputation as the Vesalius of histology (the study of tissues).
Physiologists stressed organ and tissue function — Claude Bernard
(1813-1878) emphasized the experimental method in establishing
biological knowledge and urged that medical practice should be
grounded in such knowledge.
Histology was raised to the status of an independent science by
the Swiss microanatomist Albert von Kolliker (1817-1905), who
wrote the first textbook on the subject, Handbuch der Gewebelehre
des Menschen (Handbook of the Tissues of Man) (1852). The medical
implications of cell theory were taken up by Rudolph Virchow
(1821-1902), who dominated German biomedical research for half
a century. Virchow extended the cell concept to diseased tissues; his
Die Cellularpathologie (Cellular Pathology) (1858) analyzed such
tissues from the point of view of cell formation and cell structure.
Virchow initiated the idea that the body may be regarded as a “cell
state in which every cell is a citizen.” Disease is often but civil war,
and white cells are likened to scavengers or police. Virchow
maintained that cells always arose from pre-existing cells through
cellular division. Since Kolliker and Virchow, the study of the intimate
structure and workings of the cells themselves, as distinct from the
tissues, has become a separate science, cytology, further extended to
the study of cells in disease, or cytopathology (Chapter 21).
1.2.1.11 Blood Transfusions
Vague references to blood transfusion are found in medieval
writings, though physicians historically were far more concerned
with taking blood out of the body than with putting it back in. For
example, one story tells of an attempt to prolong the life of Pope
Innocent VIII (d. 1492) by means of a blood transfusion. By one
account, a Jewish physician transfused the aged Pontiff with blood
from three small boys, who each received one ducat as their reward;
but another account says the blood was drunk, not infused. One of
the earliest proposals to transfuse blood was by Andreas Libavius
(1540-1616), a physician of Halle in Saxony, in 1615.
The first serious attempts at blood transfusion were made in
England and France. In 1657 Sir Christopher Wren (1632-1723)
carried out numerous experiments on the injection of liquids into
the veins of animals. Richard Lower (1631-1691) of Oxford carried
out the first successful transfusion from artery to vein between two
dogs in 1665, a feat repeated by the French physician Jean-Baptiste
Denys (1625-1704), who went on to attempt transfusion of blood
from one kind of animal into another. Finally, before the Royal
Society in 1667, Lower transfused a human youth, 15 years of age,
from a sheep. The patient was greatly improved and the only ill
effect was a feeling of great heat along his arm; subsequent patients
were not so lucky. Blood transfusions from lambs and calves to humans
continued to be tried in the mid 17th century, but were not very
successful, and in 1670 were finally forbidden by law in England.
The first known transfusion of human blood into an already
moribund person was attempted by James Blundell in 1818, and
on several other occasions during the 1820s, with poor results.
Transfusion was carried out on a small scale during the American
Civil War, but technical difficulties connected with premature clotting
and the occurrence of accidents arising from the use of incompatible
blood prevented the rapid acceptance of the process. The cause of
many of the untoward effects of blood transfusion was finally
explained in 1901 when the presence of agglutinins and iso-agglutinins
in the blood was demonstrated by Karl Landsteiner (1868-1943) in
Vienna, winning him the Nobel Prize in 1930; in 1907, the four
main blood groups were determined by Jan Jansky (1873-1921) of
Prague. Rhesus factor was later identified by two American scientists,
Philip Levine (1900-1987) and Rufus Stetson (1886-1967). These
advances were of fundamental importance and it became possible in
the 20th century to eliminate most of the fatalities due to incompatibility, allowing blood transfusions to be practiced reliably and with
uniformly good results.
1.2.1.12 20th Century Medicine
The 20th century saw more discoveries and advances in medical
science than all previous centuries combined. In this period, medicine
became more powerful than ever before as scientists gained knowledge
of matters and processes of illness that, at the beginning of the century,
were still unknown or mysterious. Unlike the mere palliatives of
earlier eras, 20th century physicians could actually cure some diseases,
reverse some physical traumas, and save many lives that could not
be saved before.
In the first half of the 20th century, the rational scientific
paradigm that arose in the 19th century was pursued and extended.
Acceptance of the germ theory of infection and the discovery of
leukocytes led to the rapid emergence of immunology. This allowed
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 15
medical scientists to produce protective vaccines and antisera which
largely eliminated many diseases that were previously prevalent and
dangerous, including whooping cough, measles, and diphtheria —
the first truly effective medical treatments (Figure 1.2). Acceptance
of the germ theory also led to the discovery of filterable viruses
(organisms that could pass through the pores of all known filters) in
the 1890s, and subsequently to the identification of viruses as specific
causes of yellow fever, smallpox, typhus (a Rickettsia organism),
measles, poliomyelitis, rabies, and viral meningitis. Biochemists
synthesized vitamins which were recognized as essential constituents of
a healthy diet, thus allowing the elimination of vitamin deficiency
diseases such as scurvy, rickets, osteomalacia, beriberi, pellagra,
xerophthalmia, nyctalopia, and pernicious anemia, via dietary
supplements. Many metabolic diseases became treatable due to
biochemical investigations; for example, the discovery of insulin in
1921 by the Canadian physiologists Sir Frederick Banting
(1891-1941) and Charles Best (1899-1978) rapidly transformed
diabetes from an invariably and often rapidly fatal disease into one
that could be at least partially controlled, allowing sufferers many
years of good life.
Blood group specification made transfusions convenient,
facilitating dramatic advances in many branches of medicine,
especially surgery. The first report of a successful autotransplant of
a kidney into the neck of a dog was performed by Emerich Ullmann
(1861-1937) in 1902. The first successful kidney graft between
identical twins was performed in 1954 by Joseph E. Murray
(b. 1919), who received a Nobel Prize for his work. The first heart
transplantation in man was achieved by Christiaan Barnard (b. 1922)
in 1967. Results were poor at first, but the use of new anti-rejection
techniques such as the drug cyclosporin in the late 1970s, aided by
advances in immunology, greatly improved the success of this and
other organ transplants. By 1987, a total of ~7000 human hearts
had been transplanted. At the close of the 20th century, heart, lung,
heart-lung, and liver transplants were standard procedures, while
grafts of small intestine and pancreas (the latter for refractory
diabetes) were under active clinical investigation.
Two pivotal events transformed scientific medicine from a merely
rational basis to a molecular basis, thus laying the groundwork for
21st century nanomedicine. The first pivotal event was the drug
revolution, among which the most useful and spectacular were the
antibiotics introduced between 1935-1945 and widely used ever
since. Antibiotics are significant because they actively interfere with
microbial metabolism and growth at the molecular level. The first
antibiotic drugs were the sulphonamides, in 1935. Then penicillin
became available in the 1940s, initially in very small quantities, then
mass-produced by Pfizer during and after World War II, as a result
of the research work of Alexander Fleming (1888-1955), Howard
Florey (1898-1968) and Ernst Chain (1906-1979). In 1943, Selman
A. Waksman (1888-1973) discovered streptomycin, the first effective
anti-tuberculosis drug, for which he received the 1952 Nobel Prize.
For the first time, physicians had true cures for many diseases,
especially the most common bacterial diseases. Antifungal, antiparasitic, and antiviral drugs of more limited effectiveness soon
followed.
The 20th century also produced drugs that altered mood and
levels of consciousness. Barbiturates were first introduced in 1903
(e.g. barbitone or Veronal), followed by phenobarbitone (Luminal)
in 1912 and Evipan, the barbiturate anesthetic, in 1932. By midcentury these highly addictive drugs began to be replaced by the
somewhat less-addictive benzodiazepines, including Valium and
Librium. Tranquilizers, largely the phenothiazines such as
chlorpromazine (Thorazine) and antimanics such as lithium
carbonate, came to be widely used in psychiatry as effective
medications for major mental illnesses including schizophrenia and
manic depression.
The second pivotal event was the genetics revolution, starting
with the discovery in 1953 of the information-carrying doublehelix structure of DNA by Francis Crick (b. 1916) and John B.
Watson (b. 1928)2974-2975, followed in the 1980s by the ability to chemically read the genetic code, isolate specific genes and clone them for
further study. In the mid-1980s, the Human Genome Project (Chapter 20) was launched, with the objective of fully sequencing every
gene in the human genome. The first phase of this project neared
completion as the 20th century drew to a close.2322
Molecular biology became the premier scientific discipline of
the latter 20th century.2217 By 1998, the compositions of organs,
tissues, cells, organelles, and membranes had been defined, and the
biosynthesis and catabolism of hundreds of compounds had been
elucidated. The regulation of body processes was described at
progressively finer levels in biochemical language. Many pharmacologic agents were finally understood in terms of specific molecular loci
and mechanisms of action. Advances were particularly rapid in
immunology, virology, cellular biology, peptide research, and structural
biology. A beginning was made in explaining human behavior in
mechanistic terms, as more and more chemical mediators and
pharmacologic modifiers were discovered. In biology, these disciplines
developed porous boundaries with related disciplines such as
physiology, pharmacology, neurosciences, biochemistry and biophysics.
All entered a phase of confluence, employing the common language
of chemistry.
Thus the late 20th century is best regarded as the molecular age
of basic biological science.2207 The molecular influence pervades all
the traditional disciplines underlying clinical medicine. As of
February 1999, one source2998 listed exactly 1446 genetic disorders,
most of which could be linked to a specific human chromosome;
Fig. 1.2. Deaths due to Diphtheria in England and Wales (children
under 15).2231
16 Nanomedicine • Volume I
another source2999 stated that ~4000 genetic disorders were known
in 1998. There were more than 575 known abnormal human
hemoglobins, and for each of these the precise structural defect in
the DNA of the mutant gene could be defined. Knowledge of
membrane, cytoplasmic, and nuclear receptors for hormones and
drugs was exploding, with old as well as new diseases being defined
in terms of receptor abnormalities — for example, type II hypercholesterolemia and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Recognition
of opiate receptors led to the discovery of endogenous peptides
(endorphins) with analgesic activity. Their localization promised
further understanding of the limbic system, affective states, and
addictions. Defects in a subcellular organelle, the peroxisome, were
known to be responsible for a growing list of important genetic
afflictions such as Refsum disease, Zellweger syndrome, and X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy. The genetic defect responsible for
Huntington’s disease was discovered, and in the 1990s the genetic
defects responsible for many other important neurological disorders
were becoming known, including forms of Alzheimer’s disease,
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, and common blinding retinal
degenerative disorders such as retinitis pigmentosa, Leber’s hereditary
optic neuropathy, Norrie’s disease, and choroideremia.2218
DNA sequencing techniques and restriction endonucleases
permitted precise identification of the exact structural alteration of
the gene in an increasing number of hereditary diseases. For example,
Burkitt’s lymphoma is characterized by a translocation of the distal
end of the long arm of chromosome 8 to loci on chromosomes 14,
22, or 2.2219 Gene therapy — both pharmacologic modification of
specific gene action and physical replacement of damaged genetic
segments — became possible in experimental systems. Complete
maps of the entire genomes of 18 microbial species had been compiled
and published by the end of 1998, with more than 60 others in
progress.2345 In 1992, wrote the conservative Cecil Textbook of
Medicine:
2207 “The expansion of the knowledge bank of the past
quarter century justifies great optimism for the eventual control
and cure of major diseases and the possible elimination of premature
death from illness.”
Global changes in progressive aging dysfunction were shown to
be strongly related to declining secretion of growth hormone by
Rudman2976 in 1990. Shortly thereafter, anti-aging medicine was
recognized as a distinct discipline and was promoted by the American
Academy of Anti-Aging Medicine (A4
M), a group2981 that claimed
>6000 physician and scientist members worldwide by 1998 and
had held numerous conferences.2977 In a book on the subject,2979
Ronald Klatz,2978-2980 A4
M’s president, first comprehensively
documented the implications of Rudman’s work.
While biological science was vaulting forward into the
molecular realm at a blistering pace, biomedical engineering lagged
considerably behind, though many remarkable successes had been
achieved since mid-century. Radiology expanded with sophisticated
radiotherapy, ultrasound, scanning and imaging techniques (e.g.,
CAT, PET, NMR), with submillimeter resolution in living tissues.
Surgical instruments became less damaging and less invasive; minimally
invasive techniques used OK (orifice and keyhole) surgery and surgery
performed under the “eye” of a scan. Fetuses could be screened for
abnormality and surgery then performed upon them inside the
womb, or they could be removed temporarily from the womb and
then returned to continue gestating, after surgery. Prospective parents
with fertility difficulties could make use of a wide range of therapies
including in vitro fertilization. Implantable pacemakers,
defibrillators, and ventricular assist devices were commonplace, and
in 1998 artificial wearable/implantable and full/partial replacements
for lungs, heart, kidney, liver, and pancreas were either available, in
clinical trials, or under development (Volume III). Electron microscopes with 200,000X magnifications allowed many details of
internal cellular and viral structures to be resolved as early as 1946;
by 1998, atomic-force (AFM) and scanning-tunneling microscopy
(STM) permitted direct tactile examination of individual
biomolecules in fixed cells.
As the 20th century drew to a close, a few preliminary efforts
had been made to apply the molecular approach to medical diagnostic
and clinical tools. Biotechnology was one avenue being pursued,
with the rational design of artificial enzymes and specified-ligand
binding sites having already been achieved in certain limited cases,
and the beginnings of gene therapy as noted earlier. Carbon fullerenes
(Section 2.3.2) had been used to create a water-soluble inhibitor of
HIV protease,2633,2634 and had other biological applications.2642
AFM-based force-amplified biological sensors2313 could detect
defined biological species such as cells, proteins, toxins, and DNA
at concentrations as low as 10-18 M (~1/mm3
), and automated
laboratory systems for sorting and handling individual cells2314 and
viruses3219 were commonplace. Biotech companies such as Physiome
Sciences of Princeton NJ had developed three-dimensional computer
models of the heart and other organs. Physiome’s heart model was
based on detailed molecular, biochemical, cellular and anatomical
information, including submodels of all the different cell types found
in the heart embodying knowledge of the function of each cell type
in healthy and diseased hearts, and information on gene function
and the causes and effects of congestive heart failure, arrhythmias and
heart attacks. Other cell biochemistry simulators included E-CELL
(http://www.e-cell.org) and the Virtual Cell (http://www.nrcam.
uchc.edu).3199 There was also much progress and interest in
nanostructure analysis and nanomaterials fabrication for medical
and biological purposes, with research groups emerging at major
universities such as the Cornell Nanofabrication Facility, the
University of Michigan Center for Biologic Nanotechnology, the
Rice University Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology, the
CalTech Materials and Process Simulation Center, the Washington
University Nanotechnology Center (St. Louis, MO), the USC
Laboratory for Molecular Robotics, the UCLA Exotic Materials
Center, the Institute for Molecular Medicine of the University of
Oxford, and at many biotechnology-oriented corporations such as
Nanogen and Affymetrix.
However, the greatest medical revolution of all awaits the ability to
engineer and fabricate whole devices and systems at the molecular scale.
Along this course lies nanotechnology and molecular
manufacturing, a deep well from which nanomedicine will inevitably
spring.
1.2.1.13 21st Century Medicine
It is always somewhat presumptuous to attempt to predict the
future, but in this case we are on solid ground because most of the
prerequisite historical processes are already in motion and all of them
appear to be clearly pointing in the same direction.
Medical historian Roy Porter notes that the 19th century saw
the establishment of what we think of as scientific medicine. From
about the middle of that century the textbooks and the attitudes
they reveal are recognizable as not being very different from modern
ones. Before that, medical books were clearly written to address a
different mind-set.
But human health is fundamentally biological, and biology is
fundamentally molecular. As a result, throughout the 20th century
scientific medicine began its transformation from a merely rational
basis to a fully molecular basis. First, antibiotics that interfered with
pathogens at the molecular level were introduced. Next, the ongoing
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 17
revolutions in genomics, proteomics and bioinformatics2321 provided
detailed and precise knowledge of the workings of the human body
at the molecular level. Our understanding of life advanced from
organs, to tissues, to cells, and finally to molecules, in the 20th
century. By the early 21st century, the entire human genome will be
mapped. This map will inferentially incorporate a complete catalog
of all human proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, nucleoproteins and
other molecules, including full sequence, structure, and much
functional information. Only some systemic functional knowledge,
particularly neurological, may still be lacking by that time.
This deep molecular familiarity with the human body, along with
simultaneous nanotechnological engineering advances (Chapter 2), will set
the stage for a shift from today’s molecular scientific medicine in which
fundamental new discoveries are constantly being made, to a
molecular technologic medicine in which the molecular basis of
life, by then well-known, is manipulated to produce specific
desired results. The comprehensive knowledge of human molecular
structure so painstakingly acquired during the 20th and early 21st
centuries will be used in the 21st century to design medically-active
microscopic machines. These machines, rather than being tasked
primarily with voyages of pure discovery, will instead most often be
sent on missions of cellular inspection, repair, and reconstruction.
In the coming century, the principal focus will shift from medical
science to medical engineering. Nanomedicine will involve designing
and building a vast proliferation of incredibly efficacious molecular
devices, and then deploying these devices in patients to establish
and maintain a continuous state of human healthiness.
The very earliest nanotechnology-based biomedical systems may
be used to help resolve many difficult scientific questions that
remain. They may also be employed to assist in the brute-force analysis
of the most difficult three-dimensional structures among the
100,000-odd proteins of which the human body is comprised, or
to help ascertain the precise function of each such protein. But much
of this effort should be complete within the next 20-30 years
because the reference human body has a finite parts list, and these
parts are already being sequenced, geometered and archived at an
ever-increasing pace. Once these parts are known, then the reference
human being as a biological system is at least physically specified to
completeness at the molecular level. Thereafter, nanotechnologybased discovery will consist principally of examining a particular
sick or injured patient to determine how he or she deviates from
molecular reference structures, with the physician then interpreting
these deviations in light of their possible contribution to, or detraction
from, the general health and the explicit preferences of the patient.
Fig. 1.3. Branches of medicine and associated disciplines.
18 Nanomedicine • Volume I
In brief, nanomedicine will employ molecular machine
systems to address medical problems, and will use molecular
knowledge to maintain human health at the molecular scale.
1.2.2 Volitional Normative Model of Disease
What, exactly, is “medicine”? Dictionaries give several definitions,
ranging from the very restrictive to the most general, as follows: “a
drug or remedy”;2223,2224 “any substance used for treating disease”;2220
“any drug or other substance used in treating disease, healing, or
relieving pain”;2221 “in a restricted sense, that branch of the healing
art dealing with internal diseases”;2220 “treatment of disease by medical,
as distinguished from surgical, treatment”;2223 “the branch of this
science and art that makes use of drugs, diet, etc., as distinguished
especially from surgery and obstetrics”;2221 “the study and treatment of
general diseases or those affecting the internal parts of the body”;2224
“the science of treating disease, the healing art”;2220 “the art and
science of preventing or curing disease”;2224 “the act of maintenance
of health, and prevention and treatment of disease and illness”;2223
“the department of knowledge and practice dealing with disease and
its treatment”;2222 or, most generally, “the science and art of
diagnosing, treating, curing, and preventing disease, relieving pain,
and improving and preserving health”.2221 In this book, we shall
adopt the latter, maximally-inclusive, definition of “medicine”
(Figure 1.3).
Reviewing Figure 1.3, the contemporary physician might at first
be inclined to relegate molecular approaches to some minor subfield,
perhaps “nanoanalytics,” “nanogenomics,” or “nanotherapeutics.” This
would be a serious mistake, because the application of molecular
approaches to health care will significantly impact virtually every
category of laboratory and clinical practice across the board. Thus
we are led to the broadest possible conception of nanomedicine as “the
science and technology of diagnosing, treating, and preventing disease
and traumatic injury, of relieving pain, and of preserving and
improving human health, using molecular tools and molecular
knowledge of the human body.”
This brings us to the question of “disease,” a complex term whose
meaning is still hotly debated among medical academics.2225-2230
Figure 1.4 shows the results of a survey of four different groups of
people who were read a list of common diagnostic terms and then
asked if they would rate the condition as a disease. Illnesses due to
microorganisms, or conditions in which the doctor’s contribution
to the diagnosis was important, were most likely to be called a
disease, but if the cause was a known physical or chemical agent the
condition was less likely to be regarded as disease; general practitioners
also had the broadest definition of disease.
No less than eight different types of disease concepts are held by
at least some people currently engaging in clinical reasoning and
practice, including:2226,2227
1. Disease Nominalism — A disease is whatever physicians say is
a disease. This approach avoids understanding and forestalls
inquiry, rather than furthering it.
2. Disease Relativism — A disease is identified or labeled in
accordance with explicit or implicit social norms and values at a
particular time. In 19th century Japan, for example, armpit odor
was considered a disease and its treatment constituted a medical
specialty. Similarly, 19th-century Western culture regarded
masturbation as a disease, and in the 18th century, some
conveniently identified a disease called drapetomania, the
“abnormally strong and irrational desire of a slave to be free.”2205
Various non-Western cultures having widespread parasitic
infection may consider the lack of infection to be abnormal, thus
not regarding those who are infected as suffering from disease.
3. Sociocultural Disease — Societies may possess a concept of
disease that differs from the concepts of other societies, but the concept may also differ from that held by medical practitioners within
the society itself. For instance, hypercholesterolemia is regarded as a
disease condition by doctors but not by the lay public; medical
treatment may be justified, but persons with hypercholesterolemia
may not seek treatment, even when told of the condition. Conversely,
there may be sociocultural pressure to recognize a particular condition
as a disease requiring treatment, such as alcoholism and gambling.
4. Statistical Disease— A condition is a disease when it is abnormal,
where abnormal is defined as a specific deviation from a
statistically-defined norm. This approach has many flaws. For
example, a statistical concept makes it impossible to regard an
entire population as having a disease. Thus tooth decay, which is
virtually universal in humans, is not abnormal; those lacking it are
abnormal, thus are “diseased” by this definition. More reasonably, a
future highly-aseptic society might regard bacterium-infested 20th
century humans (who contain in their bodies more foreign microbes
than native cells; Section 8.5.1) as massively infected. Another flaw
is that many statistical measurables such as body temperature and
blood pressure are continuous variables with bell-shaped distributions,
so cutoff thresholds between “normal” and “abnormal” seem highly
arbitrary.
5. Infectious Agency — Disease is caused by a microbial infectious
agent. Besides excluding systemic failures of bodily systems, this view is
unsatisfactory because the same agent can produce very different
illnesses. For instance, infection with hemolytic Streptococcus can
produce diseases as different as erysipelas and puerperal fever, and
Epstein-Barr virus is implicated in diseases as varied as Burkitt’s
lymphoma, glandular fever, and naso-pharyngeal carcinoma.2227
6. Disease Realism — Diseases have a real, substantial existence
regardless of social norms and values, and exist independent of
whether they are discovered, named, recognized, classified, or diagnosed.
Diseases are not inventions and may be identified with the operations
of biological systems, providing a reductionistic account of diseases
in terms of system components and subprocesses, even down to the
molecular level. One major problem with this view is that theories
may change over time — almost every 19th century scientific theory
was either rejected or highly modified in the 20th century. If the
identification of disease is connected with theories, then a change
in theories may alter what is viewed as a disease. For example, the
19th century obsession with constipation was reflected in the disease
labelled “autointoxication,” in which the contents of the large bowel
were believed to poison the body. Consequently much unnecessary
attention was paid to laxatives and purgatives and, when surgery of
the abdomen became possible toward the end of the century,
operations to remove the colon became fashionable in both
England and America.2205
7. Disease Idealism — Disease is the lack of health, where health
is characterized as the optimum functioning of biological systems.
Every real system inevitably falls short of the optimum in its actual
functioning. But by comparing large numbers of systems, we can
formulate standards that a particular system ought to satisfy, in
order to be the best of its kind. Thus “health” becomes a kind of
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 19
Platonic ideal that real organisms approximate, and everyone is a
less than perfect physical specimen. Since we are all flawed to some
extent, disease is a matter of degree, a more or less extreme variation
from the normative ideal of perfect functioning. This could be
combined with the statistical approach, thus characterizing disease
as a statistical variation from the ideal. But this view, like the statistical,
suffers from arbitrary thresholds that must be drawn to qualify a
measurable function as representing a diseased condition.
8. Functional Failure — Organisms and the cells that constitute
them are complex organized systems that display phenomena (e.g.
homeostasis) resulting from acting upon a program of
information. Programs acquired and developed during evolution,
encoded in DNA, control the processes of the system. Through
biomedical research, we write out the program of a process as an
explicit set (or network) of instructions. There are completely
self-contained “closed” genetic programs, and there are “open”
genetic programs that require an interaction between the
programmed system and the environment, e.g. learning or
conditioning. Normal functioning is thus the operation of
biologically programmed processes, e.g. natural functioning, and
disease may be characterized as the failure of normal functioning.
One difficulty with this view is that it enshrines the natural (Section
1.3.4) as the benchmark of health, but it is difficult to regard as
diseased a natural brunette who has dyed her hair blonde in
contravention of the natural program, and it is quite reasonable to
regard the mere possession of an appendix as a disease condition,
even though the natural program operates so as to perpetuate this
troublesome organ.* A second weakness of this view is that disease
is still defined against population norms of functionality, ignoring
* The vermiform appendix may have some minor immune function, but it is clearly nonessential and can kill when infected. Yet natural selection has not eliminated it. Indeed,
there is evidence for positive selection due to the following accident of physiological evolution. Appendicitis results when inflammation causes swelling, compressing the artery
supplying blood to the appendix. High bloodflow protects against bacterial growth, so any reduction aids infection, creating more swelling; if flow is completely cut off, bacteria
multiply rapidly until the organ bursts. A slender appendix is especially susceptible, so untreated appendicitis applies positive selective pressure to maintain a larger appendix.2185
Fig. 1.4. Opinion survey: what is disease? (modified from Campbell,Scadding, and Roberts2232)
20 Nanomedicine • Volume I
individual differences. As a perhaps overly simplistic example, 65%
of all patients employ a cisterna chyli in their lower thoracic lymph
duct, while 35% have no cisterna chyli (Figure 8.10) — which group
has a healthy natural program, and which group is “diseased”?
The author proposes a ninth view of disease, a new alternative which
seems most suitable for the nanomedical paradigm, called the
“volitional normative” model of disease. As in the “disease idealism”
view, the volitional normative model accepts the premise that
health is the optimal functioning of biological systems. Like the
“functional failure” view, the volitional normative model assumes
that optimal functioning involves the operation of biologically
programmed processes.
However, two important distinctions from these previous views
must be made. First, in the volitional normative model, normal
functioning is defined as the optimal operation of biologically
programmed processes as reflected in the patient’s own individual
genetic instructions, rather than of those processes which might be
reflected in a generalized population average or “Platonic ideal” of
such instructions; the relative function of other members of the
human population is no longer determinative. Second, physical
condition is regarded as a volitional state, in which the patient’s
desires are a crucial element in the definition of health. This is a
continuation of the current trend in which patients frequently see
themselves as active partners in their own care.
In the volitional normative model, disease is characterized not
just as the failure of “optimal” functioning, but rather as the failure
of either (a) “optimal” functioning or (b) “desired” functioning. Thus
disease may result from:
1. a failure to correctly specify desired bodily function (specification
error by the patient),
2. a flawed biological program design that doesn’t meet the
specifications (programming design error),
3. flawed execution of the biological program (execution error),
4. external interference by disease agents with the design or
execution of the biological program (exogenous error), or
5. traumatic injury or accident (structural failure).
In the early years of nanomedicine, volitional physical states will
customarily reflect “default” values which may differ only
insignificantly from the patient’s original or natural biological
programming. With a more mature nanomedicine, the patient may
gain the ability to substitute alternative natural programs for many
of his original natural programs. For example, the genes responsible
for appendix morphology or for sickle cell expression might be
replaced with genes that encode other phenotypes, such as the
phenotype of an appendix-free cecum or a phenotype for statistically
typical human erythrocytes.* Many persons will go further, electing
an artificial genetic structure which, say, eliminates age-related
diminution of the secretion of human growth hormone and other
essential endocrines. (The graduated secretion of powerful
proteolytic enzymes, perhaps targeted for gene-expression in
appropriate organs, may reverse and control the accumulation of
highly crosslinked collagenaceous debris; by 1998, many members
of the mainstream medical community were already starting to
regard aging as a treatable condition.)2310,2976-2981 On the other hand,
a congenitally blind patient might desire, for whatever personal
reasons, to retain his blindness. Hence his genetic programs that
result in the blindness phenotype would not, for him, constitute
“disease” as long as he fully understands the options and outcomes
that are available to him. (Retaining his blindness while lacking
such understanding might constitute a specification error, and such
a patient might then be considered “diseased.”) Whether the broad
pool of volitional human phenotypes will tend to converge or
diverge is unknown, although the most likely outcome is probably
a population distribution (of human biological programs) with a
tall, narrow central peak (e.g., a smaller standard deviation) but
with longer tails (e.g., exhibiting a small number of more extreme
outliers).
One minor flaw in the volitional normative model of disease is
that it relies upon the ability of patients to make fully informed
decisions concerning their own physical state. The model crucially
involves desires and beliefs, which can be irrational, especially during
mental illness, and people normally vary in their ability to acquire
and digest information. Patients also may be unconscious or too
young, whereupon default standards might be substituted in some
cases.
Nevertheless, the volitional normative view of disease appears
most appropriate for nanomedicine because it recognizes that the
era of molecular control of biology could bring considerable
molecular diversity among the human population. Conditions
representing a diseased state must of necessity become more idiosyncratic, and may progressively vary as personal preferences evolve
over time. Some patients will be more venturesome than others —
“to each his own.” As an imperfect analogy, consider a group of
individuals who each take their automobile to a mechanic. One
driver insists on having the carburetion and timing adjusted for
maximum performance (the “racer”); another driver prefers optimum
gas mileage (the “cheapskate”); still another prefers minimizing
tailpipe emissions (the “environmentalist”); and yet another requires
only that the engine be painted blue (the “aesthete”). In like manner,
different people will choose different personal specifications
(Section 1.2.5). One can only hope that the physician will never
become a mere mechanic even in an era of near-perfect human
structural and functional information; an automobile conveys a body,
but the human body conveys the soul. Agrees theorist Guttentag:2234
“The physician-patient relationship is ontologically different from
that of a maintenance engineer to a machine or a veterinarian to an
animal.”
1.2.3 Treatment Methodology
The availability of advanced nanomedical instrumentalities
should not significantly alter the classical medical treatment
methodology, although the patient experiences and outcomes will
be greatly improved. Treatment in the nanomedical era will become
faster and more accurate, efficient, and effective. In clinical practice,
patient treatment customarily includes up to six distinguishable
phases: examination, diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, validation, and
prophylaxis. Let us consider each of these, in turn.
1.2.3.1 Examination
The first step in any treatment process is the examination of the
patient, including the individual’s medical history, personal
functional and structural baseline, and current complaints. In classical
medicine, interview and observation have long been the cornerstone
of examination. In ancient times this was limited to obvious
*It is often pointed out that sickle cell is advantageous in malaria-infested countries because the trait confers resistance to malaria. This flaw-tolerant view makes a virtue
of necessity—a direct cure for malaria will undoubtedly be more efficient. Sickle cell is disadvantageous in hypoxic conditions, which is why no one with this trait can hold
a civil airline pilot’s license.2227
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 21
manifestations and simple constellations of observables, such as the
Hippocratic facies, the four signs of inflammation noted by Celsus,
or pulse rate and fever. Clinicians recognize that the traditional taking
and interpreting of oral medical histories from new patients is a
subtle and complex art,2235 although some aspects of this
process might be automated using voice recognition and text
preinterpretation software, somewhat easing the physician’s burden.
Advancing technology has also brought a plethora of tests that
contribute to accurate diagnosis, including auscultation, microscopy
and clinical bacteriology in the 19th century, and radiological
scanning, clinical biochemistry, genetic testing, and minimally
invasive exploratory surgery in the 20th century.2694
In the 21st century, new tools for nanomedical testing and
observation (Chapter 18) will include clinical in vivo cytography;
real-time whole-body microbiotic surveys; immediate access to
laboratory-quality data on the patient (e.g. blood tests such as blood
counts, dissolved gases and solutes, vitamin and ion assays); physiological
function and challenge tests; tissue composition including direct
organelle counts in specified tissue populations; quantitative flowcharts
of in cyto secondary messenger molecules, extracellular hormones
and neuropeptides; per-compartment cytoglucose inventories; and
so forth. Before a proper diagnosis can be made, the physician must
also establish the patient’s personal functional and structural baseline
against which any deviations can be noted and corrected, in keeping
with the volitional normative model of disease (Section 1.2.2).
The capabilities of nanomedical testing are explored at length in
Chapter 18. By way of introduction, it is instructive to think about
a trivial class of test procedures that might be used to diagnose a
simple infectious disease at several different levels of technological
competence. Let us consider a patient who presents with signs and
symptoms that are nonspecific in nature but which suggest an
infectious process — e.g. nasal congestion, mild fever, discomfort
and cough. The initial signs are due in part to the body’s inflammatory
response and in part to the infectious agent itself. The diagnostic
goal is to identify the infectious agent.
In the late 20th century, the usual procedure would be to culture a
sample taken from the patient, in the microbiology laboratory,
using various broths, petri plates, and biochemical tests. Some
infectious agents are easy to demonstrate. Beta hemolytic streptococci
from a throat swab will grow overnight on a blood agar plate, and
colony counts for E. coli in a urine sample are available in 24 hours.
A throat culture that the lab reports as a mixed culture causes no
excitement, and a single isolate of Staphylococcus epidermidis in a
blood culture is usually regarded as a skin contaminant.
Moving up to a higher level of technological competence,
biotechnologists describe an ideal diagnostic scenario which takes a
molecular approach to the diagnosis of infectious disease using
recombinant DNA technology. This approach was not yet possible in
1996 when first suggested,2233 but was regarded as a reasonable and
likely future application* of biotechnology in the early 21st century
given rapid progress in single-molecule DNA assay techniques:2682
“A patient presents in the clinic with mild fever, nasal congestion,
discomfort, and cough. A swab of his throat is taken. Instead of culture
to identify abnormal microorganisms by their pattern of growth, the
sample is analyzed by recombinant DNA techniques. The cotton throat
swab is mixed with a cocktail of DNA probes. Enzymes that digest and
release the DNA from both host cells and invading bacteria make the
DNA in the sample immediately available for hybridization to the
probes. The swab is swirled in the liquid mix of the prepackaged test kit
for 1 minute. The liquid is then poured through a column that separates
hybridized DNA molecules (bacterial target DNA sequences bound to
probe DNA) from all other debris [taking several minutes]. A chemiluminescence detection system for the probes shows two of several possible
colors indicating mixed infection. The diagnostic result, available in
10 minutes, indicates a Rhinovirus of a strain known to be epidemic in
the geographic area. A significant superinfection with a penicillin-resistant
streptococcus is also identified. With a definitive diagnosis, the patient
is started on the appropriate antibiotic.”
How might nanomedicine handle this test? In the nanomedical
era, taking and analyzing microbial samples will be much simpler
for the practitioner. Such analysis will be as quick and convenient
as the electronic measurement of body temperature using a tympanic
thermometer in a late 20th-century clinical office or hospital. As
described in Chapter 18, the physician faces the patient and pulls
from his pocket a lightweight handheld device resembling a pocket
calculator. He unsnaps a self-sterilizing cordless pencil-sized probe
from the side of the device and inserts the business end of the probe
into the patient’s opened mouth in the manner of a tongue depressor.
The ramifying probe tip contains billions of nanoscale molecular
assay receptors mounted on hundreds of self-guiding retractile stalks.
Each receptor is sensitive to one of thousands of specific bacterial
membrane or viral capsid ligands (Section 4.2).** An acoustic
echolocation transceiver provides gross spatial mapping. The
patient says “Ahh,” and a few seconds later a three-dimensional colorcoded map of the throat area appears on the display panel that is
held in the doctor’s hand. A bright spot marks the exact location
where the first samples are being taken. Underneath the color map
scrolls a continuously updated microflora count, listing in the
leftmost column the names of the ten most numerous microbial
and viral species that have been detected, key biochemical marker
codes in the middle column, and measured population counts in
the right column. The number counts flip up and down a bit as the
physician directs probe stalks to various locations in the pharynx to
obtain a representative sampling, with special attention to sores or
any signs of exudate. After a few more seconds, the data for two of
the bacterial species suddenly highlight in red, indicating the
distinctive molecular signatures of specific toxins or pathological
variants. One of these two species is a known, and unwelcome, hostile
pathogen. The diagnosis is completed, the infectious agent is
promptly exterminated (Chapter 19),3233 and a resurvey with the probe
several minutes afterwards reveals no evidence of the pathogen.
1.2.3.2 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is the determination of the cause and nature of a disease
in order to provide a logical basis for treatment and prognosis.
Traditionally the diagnostic process begins with a thorough history taken
from the patient and a relevant physical examination. Often this
sufficed to make a confident diagnosis, but the cause of some illnesses
remained uncertain without recourse to additional information such
as blood tests or radiological examinations. Nanotechnology-based
diagnosis (Chapter 18) will consist principally of examining the
patient to determine how he or she deviates from autogenous reference
structures and functions, and then interpreting those deviations as
healthy or unhealthy for that patient.
*In 1997, kits were being manufactured in Moscow, Russia, that allowed routine PCR diagnosis of multiple microorganisms in both clinical and agricultural settings [R. Bradbury,
personal communication, 1999], and by 1998 PCR detection of bacteria in <10 minutes was well-known.3226
**Inexpensive biosensor devices capable of detecting Salmonella contamination in meat and poultry were already commercially available in 1998.
22 Nanomedicine • Volume I
In the 20th century, diagnoses frequently involved a high
degree of uncertainty, largely due to the general lack of comprehensive
molecular diagnostic tools. Thus diagnosis would be guided by statistical analyses; one branch of decision analysis, called utility analysis, even allowed the patient to participate in the decisionmaking
process.2227 When the correct decision is unclear, urges one textbook, it is well to remember time-honored Hippocratic aphorisms such
as “first, do no harm” and “common things occur commonly.” The
eminent Canadian physician Sir William Osler (1849-1919) lamented
that “errors of judgement must occur in the practice of an art which
consists largely in balancing probabilities.” Most doctors would prefer
to understand the root cause of medical problems rather than adopt
mere statistical approaches.
Nanomedical tools will vastly reduce diagnostic uncertainty.
Using nanomedical instrumentalities, doctors will gain access to
unprecedented amounts of information about their patients including
in-office comprehensive genotyping and real-time whole-body scans
for particular bacterial coat markers, tumor cell antigens, mineral
deposits, suspected toxins, hormone imbalances of genetic or lifestyle
origin, and other specified molecules, producing three-dimensional
maps of desired targets with submillimeter spatial resolution.
Embedded in vivo nanomedical data archives (Section 10.2.5, Chapter
19) can provide onboard storage of regularly updated self-diagnostic
scans, reducing to a minimum the need for symptomatic interview
data from patients who may be unconscious, inarticulate, or verbose,
who may have limited powers of self-analysis or self-observation
and who may have forgotten, suppressed, or amplified
descriptions of symptoms.
Of course, physicians do not require an exhaustive survey of the
entire body of each patient to molecular detail to make a valid
diagnosis. In any particular case, it is the function of the trained
medical mind to quickly ascertain where and where not to look in
molecular detail. But in the nanomedical era, powerful tools will be
available to allow the practitioner to examine almost any portion of
a patient in as much detail as desired, right down to the molecular
level, with results available in seconds or minutes, and at reasonable
cost (e.g. Section 2.4.2).
1.2.3.3 Prognosis and Treatment
Prognosis is a judgement or forecast, based upon a correct
diagnosis, of the future course of a disease or injury, and of the
patient’s prospects for partial or full recovery. Guttentag2234 identifies
prognosis as “the predicted course of the reduced state of the patient’s
psychosomatic freedom of action,” and treatment as “the physician’s
ability to intervene.”
But prognosis is a function of treatment as well as disease. From
the post-Hippocratic era through the 18th century, treatments were
almost purely empirical and often did more harm than good. During
the 19th and early 20th centuries, treatments were scientific but
largely homeostatic — the medical intervention was rational but
served mainly to assist the body in healing itself. Throughout the
remainder of the 20th century, truly curative treatments began to
rescue some patients from conditions from which their unaided
bodies would not have been able to recover. Although conventional
biotechnology will enable some important tissue and cellular
replacement treatments by the early 21st century, nanomedicine
will enable major reconstructive and restorative procedures at the
tissue, cellular and molecular levels and will employ active antibiotic
devices. The prognosis will almost always be good, except in cases
of severe neural damage and a few other specialized circumstances.
Therapeutic treatments will be selected to reverse all pathological
effects of disease or injury, with a minimum of pain, discomfort,
side-effects, intrusiveness and time, and with a maximum of
effectiveness, efficiency, and likelihood of success, though of course
some tradeoffs will always exist. Nanomedicine also will excel in the
correction of molecular defects of a kind which Nature has no
predesigned tools — such as the breakdown and removal of
intracellular lipofuscin (for which there appear to be no natural
enzymes) and the removal of indigestible waste products which
interfere with neuronal axon transport.
As in Section 1.2.3.1, we may compare the therapeutic response
to a simple infection at several different levels of technological
competence. Consider a patient who has been diagnosed with eastern
equine encephalitis, a mosquito- or tick-borne arbovirus. In the 20th
century, there was no specific treatment for this disease. Care was
generally supportive, with the doctor attempting to maintain the
patient’s heart and lung function while the infection ran its course.
The prognosis was poor. There was a 50%-75% mortality rate with
frequent sequelae including seizures and paralysis, especially in
children.2180
Biotechnologists proposed a molecular approach to therapeutics
using recombinant DNA technology that was not yet possible in
1996 but was regarded as likely by the early 21st century:2233
“A patient enters the hospital with high fever and intense headaches. A
spinal fluid tap is submitted to the molecular microbiology lab. After
screening for several viruses, a species of equine encephalitis virus is
identified that is endemic to a location recently visited by the patient. A
call to the Centers for Disease Control results in the emergency delivery
of a new antiviral agent. Antisense oligonucleotides are injected into
the cerebral spinal fluid. These small DNA pieces bind directly to the
virus and block its further proliferation. A temporary reservoir giving
access to the cerebrospinal fluid is placed and infusion of this therapeutic
molecular inhibitor of the virus continues for 5 days until signs of
encephalitis have passed.”
The nanomedical therapy? As before, a nanomedical cure for
eastern equine encephalitis may be far simpler, less painful and a
great deal quicker. A single therapeutic dose consisting of ~0.1 cm3
of isotonic saline fluid containing ~10 billion active micron-size
virucidal nanodevices, a 10% volumetric nanodevice suspension, is
injected into the cerebrospinal fluid. Each therapeutic nanorobot
has chemical sensors that can unambiguously recognize fluidborne
or in cyto arbovirus particles and, once recognition has occurred,
destroy them and also reverse the cellular damage. A nanorobot
population of this size should be able to destroy all viral particles
and effect needed repairs in at most an hour (Chapter 19),3233 after
which the devices are programmed and equipped either to eliminate
themselves from the body (Chapter 16) or to be manually exfused
(e.g., nanapheresis; Section 10.3.6).
1.2.3.4 Validation and Prophylaxis
A proper therapeutic protocol will include a procedure for followup to ensure that the prescribed treatment was correctly executed
with good results. This step is often neglected in order to save costs
and may be considered unimportant by some practitioners because
approximately 80%-90% of all illnesses which take patients to the
doctor are self-curing or self-limiting.2205 For example, the common
cold, most infectious diseases and many minor injuries are problems
that usually will resolve on their own even with no treatment. In
these cases the purpose of treatment is not to provide a cure, but
rather to speed the healing process, improve comfort, and avoid
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 23
complications. Many nanomedical treatments will require supervision
and will run quickly to completion, thus follow-up may come back
into vogue. Validation may also be viewed as a post-treatment
re-diagnosis to ensure that no disease remains present in the
patient.
Prophylaxis is the prevention of disease, typically including
patient education, immunization programs, amelioration of occupational hazards, and other preventive and public health measures. In a
treatment environment that is rich in effective antibacterial
instrumentalities, those microbes which survive will evolve to produce
only modest or negligible symptoms that are insufficiently annoying to
motivate a patient to seek professional therapeutic relief. It is wellknown that bacteria can modify their behavior over time. For
example, syphilis had a much more fulminating course in the Middle
Ages than it has in the 20th century. Some future strain of the syphilitic
microbe might produce negligible symptoms, but we should still
insist on its eradication because of its potential to revert to its earlier
virulence if allowed to spread unchecked in a more benign form.
Preventative procedures may also be needed to discover, diagnose,
and treat apparently symptomless diseases, and a variety of molecularbased physiological malfunctions and structural micropathologies
may require nanoscale tools in order to detect them.
With medical conditions that require ongoing supervision and
adjustment, such as maintaining optimum hormone balance and
minimal accumulation of molecular debris (e.g. anti-aging medicine),
nanoscale monitoring stations may act as onboard cellular guidance
systems, stimulating or suppressing endocrine secretion as necessary to
preserve an ideal state of equilibrium. In some cases, direct manufacture of compounds not easily produced by ribosomes or other
biological organelles may be required.
1.2.4 Evolution of Bedside Practice
The relationship between physician and patient has been evolving
in response to the rapidly changing medical environment. Two of
the most important trends are the decline of traditional holism (with
a concomitant increase in specialization) and the rise of therapeutic
customization in medical practice.
1.2.4.1 Specialization and Holistic Medicine
Holism is a philosophy which holds that individuals function as
complete units that cannot be reduced merely to the sum of their
parts.2223 It is unarguable that a simplistic reductionist view of the
patient which ignores the complex interactions among the many
cells, tissues, organs, and systems constituting the human body is
deeply flawed. For example, an understanding of the molecular
basis of the contractile proteins of heart muscle will not alone tell us
how heart muscle cells will look or act; knowing only about the
parts of something is not sufficient to predict the behavior of the
whole.2239 However, traditional concepts of holistic medicine go
well beyond such basic systems philosophy — incorporating requirements for a consideration of all physical, emotional, social, spiritual,
environmental and economic needs of the patient.
N. Jewson2203 and others2205 have decried the modern shift away
from holistic medicine, which is asserted to have taken place in three
historical phases in the West. The initial phase is identified as the
practice of “bedside medicine,” where wealthy fee-paying clients in
the 17th and 18th centuries helped shape their own diagnosis and
treatment by medical practitioners in an holistic manner. Aspects
of the patient’s emotional and spiritual life were seen as central by
the practitioner in making a diagnosis, since most physical treatments
were only palliative and so the doctor had to focus on nonphysical
supportive measures. This frame of reference was progressively
replaced during the 19th century with the trend toward “hospital
medicine,” wherein physicians concentrated on generic classifications
of diseases that were manifested in the patient, moving doctors away
from the earlier focus on the individual as a whole person. The 20th
century saw the development of “laboratory medicine,” which moved
diagnosis and therapy even further away from the whole patient, “who
came to be medically conceived as little more than a depersonalized
object, comprised of a complex of cells.”
A more charitable view is that physicians have increasingly
specialized in treating those physical diseases for which effective
treatments may be readily specified, leaving nonphysical and
nontreatable issues for psychiatrists, social workers, fitness coaches,
priests, lawyers, or other professionals to deal with. In the 21st century
this operational specialization may become complete, since
nanomedicine phenomenologically regards the human body as an
intricately structured machine with trillions of complex interacting
parts, with each part (and each subsystem of parts) subject to
individual scrutiny, repair, and possibly replacement by artificial
technological means. In this new medical cosmology, the concept
of the whole patient almost completely dissolves into a data-intensive
whirlwind of molecular detail at the cellular, tissue, organ, and
systemic levels.
And yet, as in a bygone era, patients once again will help to
shape their own diagnosis and treatment at the hands of medical
practitioners who begin to apply the volitional normative model of
disease (Section 1.2.2) in their practices. This may breathe new life
into the age-old medical school dictum to “treat the patient as a
person” and to “focus on the sick person” rather than exclusively on
the body.2230
The availability of extremely powerful and transforming
molecular technologies also argues for a return to the romantic and
perhaps quaint concept of a single doctor taking care of a single
patient. The potential for interactions among highly potent
nanorobotic instrumentalities argues for diagnostic and therapeutic
“gatekeeping” by a single trusted practitioner in whom strategic
treatment responsibility is vested — in partnership, of course, with
the patient.
1.2.4.2 Customized Diagnosis and Therapeutics
In science the objective is to understand the individual occurrence
by means of a general law; in medical practice, knowledge of what
is generally the case does not tell the physician how to treat a particular
patient. Thus the problem of how to proceed from the prototypic
case to the individual instance remains to be solved in a systematic
manner by the practitioner.2230
The practitioner of “bedside medicine” in the 17th and 18th
centuries had few curative and almost no customized tools at his
disposal — perhaps a few dozen basic surgical techniques, performed
septically, hazardously, and without anesthesia, and a drug/herbal
formulary consisting of a few hundred substances. For instance, the
Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia of 1803 listed only 222 simples while the
London Pharmacopoeia of 1809 listed fewer than 200 items, most of
which had variable, uncertain, minimal, or nonspecific potency. A
few more options became available to the 19th century medical
practitioner, including complex surgical techniques for specific
conditions that could be performed aseptically with anesthesia and
a good chance for success, a somewhat broader and more efficacious
pharmacopeia, vaccines targeted to several diseases, and an improving
diagnostic ability. By the 20th century, the physician could prescribe
24 Nanomedicine • Volume I
from among tens of thousands of specific drugs to target specific
bacterial, viral, fungal, or parasitic infections; select from among a
very precise array of anesthetic agents, chosen to avoid allergic
responses in particular patients; perform a wide variety of noninvasive
tests and scans for diagnostic purposes to identify very specific
conditions; and perform minimally invasive surgeries directed at
many arbitrary tissue masses as small as 1 mm3 in volume. The first
glimmerings of personalized genetic therapies also began to appear.
With the arrival of nanomedicine in the 21st century, the treatment
paradigm will complete its transition from coarse-grained, onesize-fits-all, slow-acting methods to molecularly-precise, completely
customized, speedy and highly-efficacious procedures and instrumentalities. The irregular shotgun pattern of 18th century palliatives
will evolve during the early 21st century into a penetrating and
perfectly tailored hail of “magic bullets” each targeting an individual
cell or group of cells unique to the individual patient. The 19th
century herbalist John Ayrton Paris could have been describing the
nanomedical future in his popular textbook Pharmacologia, 1840
edition, when he wrote:
“If [a physician] prescribes upon truly scientific principles, he will rarely
in the course of his practice compose two formulae that shall, in every
respect, be perfectly similar, for the plain reason that he will never meet
with two cases exactly alike. Now let me ask what constitutes the essential
difference between the true physician and his counterfeit — between
the philosopher and the empiric? Simply this — that the latter exhibits
the same medicine in every disease, however widely each may differ
from the other in its symptoms and character; while the former examines,
in the spirit of philosophic analysis, all the existing peculiarities of his
patient, and of his discord...and then adapts with a sound discretion
and with a correct judgement of his medicinal agents, such means as
may best be calculated to control and correct the patient’s morbid
condition.”
1.2.4.3 The Physician-Patient Relationship
Many other aspects of the physician-patient relationship, especially
as this relationship may evolve in the coming era of nanomedicine,
are important and worthy of extensive discussion. One such issue is
the obligation of both parties in the partnership to tell the truth.
The patient as a fellow human being has every right to know the
truth about his or her biological condition, but other considerations
may enter into the fulfillment of this obligation.2234 Patients have a
quite natural anxiety about their own possible death, and it has
been claimed that this anxiety implies that no one can be truly
objective toward his or her own body.2236 Guttentag2234 observes
that “telling an unwelcome truth to the unprepared is as ill-conceived
as trying to hide the truth from the prepared.”
In the nanomedical era, the sheer number of “truths” that may
become available for disclosure will increase enormously even as the
terminal prognosis becomes rare. For example, each human being is
believed to possess at least 4-10 potentially serious genetic defects;
up to 1% of human DNA is of exogenous viral origin, and as much
as 10% of the genome consists of transposons, discrete sequences
that are positionally mobile among the chromosomes (Chapter 20).
Should something be done about this, or not? What should the
average patient make of the news that his physician has discovered
exactly 57 submicron-scale lamellar defects scattered throughout
the compact bone of the caudal epiphysis of the patient’s right
humerus? In the nanomedical era, people will gain the ability to
specify their own physical structure to minute detail, but many
patients will not be ready, willing, or able to assume responsibility
for this knowledge. Thus there is no ideal substitute for the doctor’s
interpretative abilities and judgements on the patient’s behalf as to
the personal significance of specific diagnostic information. As the
great clinician Thomas Addis observed in another context:2237
“Honesty with patients requires thought and discipline and effort.”
Perhaps the single most important aspect of the physicianpatient relationship, in any century, is the humanistic quality of the
good doctor. The patient seeks a physician who cares about him as
a person and will diagnose and prescribe in a sensitive and compassionate manner, accepting some degree of obligation to the
patient. Speaking to medical students, J.C. Bennett2238 describes
the implicit social contract between doctor and patient that will
still apply in the nanomedical era, as it does today:
“To receive medical care, patients must trust their bodies and their very
lives to physicians, and so to be in an honest position to give medical
care, physicians must earn such radical trust. Mere technical treatment
of disease does not suffice. Patients must be able reasonably to believe
that their physicians care about them in an extraordinarily personal
way. This exchange of care for trust, while not identical to friendship or
love, is equally binding. From it develops an interdependence that is far
from unwholesome; rather, it potentiates care and promotes healing.
Our late twentieth century sophistication and technologic orientation
have too often cost us warmth, humor, and humanity, leaving us in
social isolation. We do far better as professionals to err on the side of
being human with our patients, than to try to play deus ex machina,
the god from the machine.”
1.2.5 Changing View of the Human Body
How does a patient regard his or her own body, and how might
this most intimate of all relationships change in the nanomedical
era? The so-called dualist theory of the human compound, as originally
developed by Descartes and widely accepted today by the ordinary
person, holds that the human being consists of two separate kinds
of thing: the body and the mind or soul. The body acts as a host or
receptacle for the mind. The mind, often called “the ghost in the
machine,” is manifested by the brain, which it uses (via the bodily
senses) to acquire and store information about the world and to
integrate this with its genetically-driven imperative to live, thus
resolving internal conflicts among action-choices and expressing
these in what we (in our consciousness) experience as decisive
action.
Scientific medicine has concentrated primarily on the body. The
ancient Roman physician Galen first dissected and vivisected a variety
of animals to increase his knowledge of anatomy and physiology,
and dissection became increasingly important in the training of
physicians and surgeons, and in painting and sculpture, during the
Renaissance. By the late 20th century, dissection had reached the
molecular level, with the insides of the human cell and nucleus
being taken apart and examined by molecular biologists, literally
receptor by receptor. Dissection and the mechanistic understanding it
provides have led some to decry what they regard as the modern
“soulless” view of the human body as a mere machine.
In the nanomedical era, even the most diehard reductionist must
come to see the human body not merely as a heap of parts but
rather as a finely tuned vehicle that is owned and piloted by a single
human mind. As with automobiles, some body-owners will be more
diligent about maintenance, regular tuneups, and paint jobs than
other body-owners. Some will crave the latest upgrades, while
others may prefer a more conservative model that reliably gets them
around town. At either extreme, all human vices and virtues will be
on full display, though one may perhaps anticipate an increasing
pride of corporeal ownership if for no other reason than because
maintenance and repair will become quick, convenient, and
inexpensive.
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 25
From this simple analogy of body-and-mind to car-and-driver,
it might at first appear that the advent of nanomedical technology
will confirm and strengthen the traditional dualist conception of
the body. But closer inspection reveals that the analogy is at best
incomplete, and at worst deeply flawed. This is because mind, first
being necessarily embedded in physical structure and relying upon
that structure for its faithful execution, and second, this physical
structure now being manipulable at the molecular level, enters also
into the purview of our mechanic. Both car and driver may be
modified in the shop. Speaking allegorically, it is as if the driver,
after getting his car a tuneup, emerges from the shop no longer
favoring chocolate but enjoying vanilla instead, or now preferring
jazz over classical, the opposite of before. Such psychological changes
may be either volitional or emergent.
Until the late 20th century, human progress was measured
almost exclusively in terms of externalities. Food was gathered, then
sown, then manufactured. Shelters had no running water, then
gained outhouses, then indoor plumbing. Natural lighting and
campfires gave way to candles, then oil lamps, then electric illumination. Finger-counting yielded first to the abacus, then the
mechanical adding machine, and finally to the digital computer.
But throughout all of history, the human body itself has remained
largely untouched by progress. We have always regarded our bodies,
evolved by natural selection, as fundamentally inviolate and
immutable — subject perhaps to various natural or traumatic
degradations, but rarely to any significant intrinsic improvement
on the timescale of human civilization.
Now we are set to embark upon an era in which our natural
physiological equipment may for the first time in history become
capable of being altered, improved, augmented, or rendered more
comfortable or convenient, due to advances in medical technology.
The physical human body may be one of the last bastions of
“naturalness” (Section 1.3.4). It will also be one of the last elements in
our common worldview to be modernized.
Our subjective experience of reality will shift by subtle degrees.
For instance, all objective information about our physical surroundings has traditionally arrived in the conscious mind via the various
natural senses such as hearing, sight, and smell. In the nanomedical era,
machine-mediated sensory modalities may permit direct perception of
physical phenomena well removed from our bodies in both time
and space, or which are qualitatively or quantitatively inaccessible
to our original natural senses. Perception will gradually expand to
incorporate nonphysical phenomena including abstract models of
mental software, purely artificial constructs of simulated or enhanced
realities,2991 and even the mental states of others. Such new perceptions
will inevitably alter the way our minds process information.
But the winds of change will sweep deeper still, into our very
souls. Like ants oblivious to the collective purpose of their colony,
the billions of neurons in the human brain are all busily buzzing,
wholly ignorant of the emergent plan. This is the physical, mechanical
world of our electrochemical hardware. People also have thoughts,
feelings, emotions, and volitions, a higher level in the data processing
hierarchy which in turn is equally oblivious of the brain cells. We
can happily think while being totally unaware of any help from our
neurons. But nanomedicine will give us unprecedented systemic
multilevel access to our internal physical and mental states, including
real-time operating parameters of our own organs, tissues, and cells,
and, if desired, the activities of small groups of (or even individual)
neurons. Diverse parts of our selves previously closed to our attention
may slowly conjoin and enter our conscious awareness.
Will this access promote an integrated identity or lead to hopeless
confusion, or worse? Marvin Minsky, in his collection of essays
The Society of Mind,
2982 persuasively argues that our selves or
identities are in fact networks of semi-autonomous neurological
“agencies” which sometimes cooperate and sometimes compete with
one another. We think of ourselves as singular “persons,” but we
also experience “conflicting desires” and “differing viewpoints” within
our minds that are, in Minsky’s view, a direct experience of the
multiplicity of our brain’s neurostructures. Other models of the
human mind2988-2990,3728 suggest that our internal mental states,
prospectively transparent via nanomedical augmentation,2992,2993
are diverse and intricate; Julian Jaynes2983 is one of many writers
who have drawn attention to profound dichotomies between the
two cerebral hemispheres. The component-oriented personality
models of Freud (e.g. ego/id/superego),2984 Jung (e.g. archetypes),2985
and Rank (e.g. will/counterwill),2986 and the identification of
4541 distinct personality traits by Allport and Odbert2987 warn us
that full access to our brain’s architecture could be perilous.
More seriously, most of us suppose that we are endowed with
free will. But if choices by free will are simply the resolution of
conflicts of neurological subsystems, and we become consciously
aware of those subsystems and are able to intervene in their processes,
do we run the risk of runaway instabilities at the deepest levels of
what we presently call our “minds”? Will we find that these instabilities
are profound counterparts to the maladies we currently designate as
epilepsy, or psychosomatic illnesses? In any redesigns of our brains
which would involve opening doors to, quite literally, the ultrastructure of our thoughts, we could become “naked to ourselves” in
ways that we can only vaguely speculate about at present. Along
with any other dangers we might encounter, this will raise entirely
new issues of the proper role of psychotherapy and the sanctity of
personal privacy.2996
Repairs to the brain may be carefully monitored to ensure quality
control and to verify intended results, as already proposed in
another context.3000 Major modifications might be strictly regulated,
both to prevent abuse by unscrupulous third parties and also to
forestall accidental or volitional alterations that could render the
patient a significant threat to society. Nanomedical alterations to
the brain and other physical systems may give us vastly expanded
freedom to be who we choose to be (Section 1.3.4), along with
increased responsibility to make wise and informed choices. The
ethical and legal aspects of these questions, as well as the scientific
and psychological ones, are extremely important and should be
thoroughly debated in the years and decades that lie ahead.
1.3 The Nanomedical Perspective
1.3.1 Nanomedicine and Molecular Nanotechnology
A mature nanomedicine will require the ability to build structures
and devices to atomic precision, hence molecular nanotechnology
and molecular manufacturing are key enabling technologies for
nanomedicine. The prefix “nano-” (from the Greek root nanos, or
dwarf) means one-billionth (10-9) of something. The term
“nanotechnology” refers most generally to technology on the scale
of a billionth of a meter, or a nanometer (a nanometer is ~6 carbon
atoms wide). Similarly, the words “nanomachine,” “nanorobot,”
“nanomotor” and “nanocomputer” may refer to complex engineered
objects fabricated by positioning matter with molecular control.
Molecular engineering was discussed as an extension of bulk
technologies in the 1960s and 1970s by von Hippel,2245 von
Foester,2246 and Zingsheim.2247The phrase “Nano-Technology” was
first used in print in 1974 by N. Taniguchi2241 to refer to the
increasingly precise machining and finishing of materials, progressing
from larger to smaller scales and ultimately to nanoscale tolerances,
26 Nanomedicine • Volume I
following in the path of Feynman’s proposed “top-down”
approach,156 a schemata which persisted in Taniguchi’s thinking
throughout the 1980s282 and 1990s.2242 In 1981, K.E. Drexler182
described a new “bottom-up” approach involving molecular
manipulation and molecular engineering in the context of building
molecular machines and molecular devices with atomic precision, a
fundamentally different mind-set. Drexler again described molecular
technology311 in 1982 and molecular mechanical devices2243 in
1983, first using the word “nanotechnology” in 1985259 and 19868
as synonymous with molecular technology, finally settling upon
“molecular nanotechnology” in 19919 and “molecular machine
systems” in 1992279 to clarify that his concept involved working
devices constructed with atomic precision, as distinguished from
nanostructured bulk materials, micromachinery, polymeric selfassembly, pure biotechnology, nanolithography, Langmuir-Blodgett
thin films, and the like.154,3262 Drexler’s definition — molecular
nanotechnology as the three-dimensional positional control of
atomic and molecular structure to create materials and devices with
molecular precision — is the usage adopted in this book. The first
known use of the term “nanomedicine” was in 1991 by Drexler,
Peterson, and Pergamit in their popular book Unbounding the Future.
9
Is molecular nanotechnology possible? This question is explicitly
addressed in Chapter 2, but the bottom line is that molecular
nanotechnology violates no physical laws and there exist many possible
technical paths leading to useful results.10 Even by 1985, for
example, G. Yamamoto164 had reported on molecular gears, describing
“compounds that exist in conformations which are regarded as static
meshed gears with two-toothed and three-toothed wheels and some
of them behave as dynamic gears.” H. Iwamura163 prepared a system
that formed a chain of beveled molecular gears with ~GHz rotation
rates. In 1998, it was generally accepted that molecular
nanotechnology would be developed, although there was still some
disagreement about how long it would take.
It is often noted that molecular biological systems are themselves
nanomachines, constituting an existence proof for molecular
nanotechnology.8-10,3261 Indeed, biotechnology is one possible
implementation pathway for molecular nanotechnology that is
being pursued (Section 2.3.1). Table 1.3 reveals the close functional
correspondence between the macroscale components of everyday
machines and the molecular components of natural biological systems.
Such comparisons have a long history. For example, Marcello
Malpighi (1628-1694), a professor of medicine in Pisa who discovered
the fine structure of the lungs and the capillaries using the
microscope,2204 once observed that “our bodies are composed of
strings, thread, beams, levers, cloth, flowing fluids, cisterns, ducts,
filters, sieves, and other similar mechanisms.”
Parallels to living systems as molecular machines were drawn by
Changeau,162 McClaire,2248 Laing,2249-2251 Drexler,182 and
Mitchell,2252 inspiring early thinking in molecular manufacturing.
For example, in 1991 Drexler9
 observed:
“Technology-as-we-know-it is a product of industry, of manufacturing
and chemical engineering. Industry-as-we-know-it takes things from
nature — ore from mountains, trees from forests — and coerces them
into forms that someone considers useful. Trees become lumber, then
houses. Mountains become rubble, then molten iron, then steel, then
cars. Sand becomes a purified gas, then silicon, then chips. And so it
goes. Each process is crude, based on cutting, stirring, baking, spraying,
etching, grinding, and the like.”
“Trees, though, are not crude. To make wood and leaves, they neither
cut, stir, bake, spray, etch, nor grind. Instead, they gather solar energy
using molecular electronic devices, the photosynthetic reaction centers of
chloroplasts. They use that energy to drive molecular machines — active
devices with moving parts of precise, molecular structure — which
process carbon dioxide and water into oxygen and molecular building
blocks. They use other molecular machines to join these molecular building blocks to form roots, trunks, branches, twigs, solar collectors, and
more molecular machinery. Every tree makes leaves, and each leaf is
more sophisticated than a spacecraft, more finely patterned than the
latest chip from Silicon Valley. They do all this without noise, heat,
toxic fumes, or human labor, and they consume pollutants as they go.
Viewed this way, trees are high technology. Chips and rockets are not.”
Contemplating applications of nanotechnology to medicine,
Brian Wowk261 concluded that 20th century physicians were in a
predicament similar to that which would be faced by 18th-century
engineers trying to maintain a 20th-century automobile — repairs
would be crude at best, and breakdowns inevitable:
“Like primitive engineers faced with advanced technology, medicine
must `catch up’ with the technology level of the human body before it
can become really effective. What is the technology level? Since the
human body is basically an extremely complex system of interacting
molecules (i.e., a molecular machine), the technology required to
truly understand and repair the body is molecular machine technology
— nanotechnology. A natural consequence of [our achieving] this level
of technology will be the ability to analyze and repair the human body
Table 1.3. Comparison of Macroscale and Biomolecular
Components and Functions182
Macroscale Device Device Function Biomolecular Examples
Struts, beams, casings Transmit force, Microtubules,
 hold positions cellulose
Cables Transmit tension Collagen
Fasteners, glue Connect parts Intermolecular
forces
Solenoids, Move things Conformation-changing
actuators proteins, actin/myosin
Motors Turn shafts Flagellar motor
Drive shafts Transmit torque Bacterial flagella
Bearings Support moving Sigma bonds
parts
Containers Hold fluids Vesicles
Pumps Move fluids Flagella, membrane
proteins
Conveyor belts Move components RNA moved by fixed
ribosome (partial analog)
Clamps Hold workpieces Enzymatic binding
sites
Tools Modify workpieces Metallic complexes,
functional groups
Production lines Construct devices Enzyme systems,
ribosomes
Numerical control Store and read Genetic system
systems programs
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 27
as completely and effectively as we can repair any conventional
machine today.”
In Engines of Creation,
8
 Drexler drew inspiration from the cell’s
eye view to recognize that nanotechnology could bring a
fundamental breakthrough in medicine. Noting that 20th century
physicians relied chiefly on surgery and drugs to treat illness, Drexler
explained:
“Surgeons have advanced from stitching wounds and amputating limbs
to repairing hearts and reattaching limbs. Using microscopes and fine
tools, they join delicate blood vessels and nerves. Yet even the best
microsurgeon cannot cut and stitch finer tissue structures. Modern scalpels
and sutures are simply too coarse for repairing capillaries, cells, and
molecules. Consider `delicate’ surgery from a cell’s perspective. A huge
blade sweeps down, chopping blindly past and through the molecular
machinery of a crowd of cells, slaughtering thousands. Later, a great
obelisk plunges through the divided crowd, dragging a cable as wide as
a freight train behind it to rope the crowd together again. From a cell’s
perspective, even the most delicate surgery, performed with exquisite
knives and great skill, is still a butcher job. Only the ability of cells to
abandon their dead, regroup, and multiply makes healing possible.”
“Drug therapy, unlike surgery, deals with the finest structures in cells.
Drug molecules are simple molecular devices. Many affect specific molecules in cells. Morphine molecules, for example, bind to certain receptor
molecules in brain cells, affecting the neural impulses that signal pain.
Insulin, beta blockers, and other drugs fit other receptors. But drug
molecules work without direction. Once dumped into the body, they
tumble and bump around in solution haphazardly until they bump a
target molecule, fit, and stick, affecting its function. Drug molecules
affect tissues at the molecular level, but they are too simple to sense,
plan, and act. Molecular machines directed by nanocomputers will
offer physicians another choice. They will combine sensors, programs,
and molecular tools to form systems able to examine and repair the
ultimate components of individual cells. They will bring surgical control to
the molecular domain.”
By the end of the 20th century, mainstream military (DoD),
NIH, NSF, and other U.S. government and international groups
had begun to seriously consider the potential future applications of
molecular nanotechnology in medicine. For example, in 1997 a panel
of U.S. Department of Defense health science experts known as
Military Health Service Systems (MHSS) 2020 concluded in its
final report:1095
“If a breakthrough to a [molecular] assembler occurs within ten to
fifteen years, an entirely new field of nanomedicine will emerge by 2020.
Initial applications will be focused outside the body in areas such as
diagnostics and pharmaceutical manufacturing. The most powerful uses
would eventually be within the body. Possible applications include
programmable immune machines that travel through the bloodstream,
supplementing the natural immune system; cell herding machines to
stimulate rapid healing and tissue reconstruction; and cell repair
machines to perform genetic surgery.”
The present book takes as its starting point the assumption that
the mass production of nanomachines at modest cost is technically
feasible (Chapter 2), and then explores the medical implications of
this assumption. Proposed systems presented in this trilogy are
intended not as final engineering blueprints but merely as points of
departure for further analysis and refinement. All designs and projected
capabilities are, for the most part, conservatively drawn with generous
safety margins, leaving a considerable volume of design space yet to
be explored by more intrepid future investigators.
1.3.2 Nanomedicine: History of the Idea
Conclusive proof of the existence of atoms was not obtained
until the close of the 19th century. This may explain why the idea
of nanomedicine is an exclusively 20th century phenomenon. The
first hint of it may be found in a famous 1929 essay written by J.D.
Bernal:2972
“The discoveries of the twentieth century, particularly the micro-mechanics
of the Quantum Theory which touch on the nature of matter itself, are
far more fundamental and must in time produce far more important
results. The first step will be the development of new materials and new
processes in which physics, chemistry and mechanics will be inextricably
fused. The stage should soon be reached when materials can be produced
which are not merely modifications of what nature has given us in the
way of stones, metals, woods and fibers, but are made to specifications
of a molecular architecture. Already we know all the varieties of atoms;
we are beginning to know the forces that bind them together; soon we
shall be doing this in a way to suit our own purposes. The result — not
so very distant — will probably be the passing of the age of metals and
all that it implies — mines, furnaces, and engines of massive construction.
Instead we should have a world of fabric materials, light and elastic,
strong only for the purposes for which they are being used, a world which
will imitate the balanced perfection of a living body.”
Development of the concept of nanomedicine has followed two
principal paths2244 which Richard Smalley has termed “wet
nanotechnology” in the biological tradition, and “dry
nanotechnology” in the mechanical tradition. Both approaches were
presaged in speculative fiction. The following abbreviated history
focuses on nanomedicine largely to the exclusion of broader issues
in molecular engineering, manufacturing and nanoscopy, and
includes a number of inspirational, speculative, or fictional early
references from non-refereed sources.
We will first consider the biotechnology approach (Section
1.3.2.1), followed by the molecular nanotechnology approach
(Sections 1.3.2.2-3), and then these two approaches will be contrasted
and compared in Section 1.3.3.
1.3.2.1 The Biological Tradition
The general idea of biological engineering stretches back at least
to the mid-19th century, but the first science fiction story involving
actual genetic engineering was “Proteus Island” (1936), written by
the chemical engineer Stanley Weinbaum. Artificial engineered
organisms subsequently appeared in minor roles in several stories, a
notable example being the familiars employed by the fake witches
in Fritz Leiber’s “Gather, Darkness!” (1943), and A.E. van Vogt used
“gene transformation” to create the superman in “Slan” (1940). The
first artificially evolved creatures appeared in Theodore Sturgeon’s
“Microcosmic God” (1941), wherein a biochemist established
conditions allowing accelerated artificial evolution, creating the
Neoterics, a submillimeter-sized race of intelligent hypermetabolic
creatures which could accomplish tasks very rapidly. The first
artificially designed microcreatures appeared in James Blish’s “Surface
Tension” (1952). In this story, crash-landed dying human astronauts
create a completely new form of humanity — tiny men and women
reduced to protozoan size — who are seeded in the pools and puddles
at the surface of the new planet, and who go on to master the
biotechnology necessary to travel from one water puddle to
another.
The scientific tradition of biological nanomachines for medical
purposes began in 1964 when Robert Ettinger, an early cryonics
pioneer, suggested that cellular-level or even molecular-level repair
might be developed for life extension. Ettinger157 speculated that
“...surgeon machines, working 24 hours a day for decades or even
28 Nanomedicine • Volume I
centuries, will tenderly restore the frozen brains, cell by cell, or even
molecule by molecule in critical areas.”
In 1965, the synthesis of artificial life was publicly proposed as a
national goal by the president of the American Chemical Society, Professor Charles Price, who pointed out that many new types of life might
be made, not “mere imitations” of biology as we know it.153
In 1967, Isaac Asimov2257 suggested the future possibility of
“factories...where the working machinery consists of submicroscopic
nucleic acids” and that a “repertoire of hundreds or thousands of
complex enzymes” could be used to “bring about chemical reactions
more conveniently than any methods now used” and also for “helping
to construct life.”
In 1968, G.R. Taylor2258 cited the possibilities for genetic
engineering and genetic surgery: “The microsurgery of DNA may
possibly be achieved by physical methods: fine beams of radiation
(probably laser light or pulsed X-rays) may be used to slice through
the DNA molecule at desired points.” He also cited predictions
that bacteria would soon be programmed.
In 1969, J. White2259 suggested that a modified virus could be
used as a cell repair machine: “It has been proposed that appropriate
genetic information be introduced by means of artificially constructed
virus particles into a congenitally defective cell for remedy; similar
means may be used for the more general case of repair. The repair
program must use means such as protein synthesis and metabolic
pathways to diagnose and repair any damage... [Information] can
be preserved by specifying that the repair program incorporate
appropriate RNA tapes into itself...”
In 1970, Jeon et al158 carried out “the reassembly of Amoeba
proteus from its major components: namely nucleus, cytoplasm, and
cell membrane,” taken from three different cells.
In 1972, Ettinger160 proposed using genetic engineering to make
microscopic biorobots: “Genetic engineering’s most sensational
impact will concern the modification of humans, but it will have
other uses as well. Some of the “robots” that will serve us will need
to be nanominiaturized.” Existing organisms could be modified to
make biologically-based programmable biorobots for medical
applications: “If we can design sufficiently complex behavior patterns
into microscopically small organisms, there are obvious and endless
possibilities, some of the most important in the medical area. Perhaps
we can carry guardian and scavenger organisms in the blood, superior
to the leukocytes and other agents of our human heritage, that will
efficiently hunt down and clean out a wide variety of hostile or
damaging invaders.” Computerized cellular repair machines “must
use means such as protein synthesis and metabolic pathways to
diagnose and repair any damage...[Information] can be preserved
by specifying that the repair program incorporate appropriate RNA
tapes into itself....” Also in 1972, Danielli [2260] described various
possibilities for generating new life forms via “life-synthesis” and
genetic engineering, noting that “macromolecular engineering”
might enable the development of very powerful and compact
macromolecular computer systems.
In 1974, Halacy2261 noted “some rather inglorious ways” to use
“the miracle of artificial life,” including potential capabilities for
growing diverse items ranging from computers to airplanes.
Morowitz159 suggested cooling cells to cryogenic temperatures in
order to analyze and determine their structure. Artificial cells could
also be assembled at such temperatures and then be set in motion
by thawing. Morowitz further reported that microsurgery experiments
on amoebas “have been most dramatic. Cell fractions from four
different animals can be injected into the eviscerated ghost of a fifth
amoeba, and a living functioning organism results.”
In 1975, Richard Laing2250 described the theoretical possibility
of molecular machine self-replicators using molecular (data) tapes
based on the idea of universal Turing machines, examining several
ways that such “artificial organisms” might replicate themselves as
“a vehicle for the exploration of broad biological possibilities.”
In 1976, Donaldson2262 presented the first detailed (and quite
ambitious) list of biotechnological techniques that appeared necessary
to achieve cell repair and might prove feasible, writing at a time that
predated many current capabilities such as automated protein/DNA
sequencing and synthesis, and most knowledge of restrictions on
cellular developmental pathways and genetic programs and networks.
For repair at the level of the cell, Donaldson’s techniques would
have included:
1. The ability to design enzymes to produce specific repair functions
such as renaturing denatured proteins, joining broken
lipoprotein complexes, annealing broken strands of DNA or
RNA, reading proteins of existing or special types onto RNA
and replicating them, and giving a cell the ability to metabolize
new substrates, use novel cofactors, or construct essential amino
acids;
2. Specially constructed bacteria or macrophages able to replicate
themselves, spread throughout a specific target tissue, and carry
out specific repairs according to the programs designed into their
DNA/RNA; these could be designed to operate at unnatural
temperatures or to utilize metabolic pathways not presently
found in nature;
3. The abilities to re-introduce lost DNA or lost organelles such as
mitochondria into a cell, to introduce entirely new forms of
organelles perhaps to perform specific repair functions, and to
introduce new metabolic capacities into a cell;
4. The ability to modify at will the developmental program of a
cell, as for instance to induce postmitotic cells such as neurons
to divide,* according to a specific program, forming daughter
cells with specific properties; and
5. Several different types of repair bacteria able to work together
in an integrated fashion, and linked together by chemical means
(e.g. hormones), so as to apply optimal repairs to every body
cell in order to (A) diagnose the precise nature of the damage,
call other repair bacteria to its location, and report to the
attending doctor that new types of repair bacteria other than
those already introduced are needed, and (B) identify structures
which must be preserved (e.g. memory) and reconstruct them
if necessary.
For repairs at the level of the whole organism, Donaldson
offered the following rather aggressive biological nanotechnology
techniques:
1. Understanding the physiology of aging combined with the ability
to reverse it;
* It is now known that genetic programs to allow postmitotic cell division do not exist for many cells, although in theory artificial programs could possibly be devised. Stem
cells may differentiate, and in some cases cells may be induced to de-differentiate back to stem cells thus allowing subsequent division and re-differentiation — but losing,
in the case of neurons, the existing neural connections.
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 29
2. Control over growth and development, including the ability to
program types of growth and development which do not
naturally occur, such as growth of new eyes or other organs
which have been lost or damaged, growth of an entire and
well-formed body from a head alone, and regrowth of injured
or lost brain tissue; and
3. Nonpermanent “substitute organs” which will take over from
others which have been lost, including (A) the ability to keep a
given tissue alive and healthy in vitro for an indefinite time and
similar abilities for a body part, and (B) temporary replacements
for any body organ which may have been lost. These would be
used to support the body while new organs were growing, e.g.
as “metabolic crutches.” This capacity specifically includes the
ability to make temporary replacements for diffuse systems such
as the vascular or nervous systems. For instance, a specially created
“plant” would grow an entire vascular system into the patient,
down to replacement for the capillaries and venules from a single
seed, always introducing its fibrils between cells and destroying
none or very little of the original structure.
The last of these is a description of a (clearly speculative)
“repair net,” a concept which Donaldson may have been the first to
propose in 1976. A whole-body repair net was later termed a
“chrysalis”,161,1724 and twelve years later, in 1988, Donaldson provided
an artist’s conception and an additional description of these proposed
biotechnological instrumentalities:1724
“Severe crushing or mangling injuries require us to provide a new vascular
system. The repair device might resemble a fungus, growing mycelia
into the injured tissue. A repair net would grow into a [crushed] limb,
guided by recognition of the injured cells and a plan for how the limb
should look after repair....[In the most severe injuries,] a chrysalis first
envelops the patient, then enters in between all his cells. It disassembles
the patient, surrounding each cell with its own repair machinery and
vascular system. The geometry already preserves information about
locations of the patient’s cells. If necessary, morphogen chemical gradients
could also retain this information. A patient would [locally] swell up to
10 times original diameter. After repair, the chrysalis withdraws the
same way it entered.”
In 1977, Darwin2263 further developed the theme of tissue
repair and cellular repair biomachines, independently proposing a
modified white blood cell to perform repair functions.
In 1981, Asimov2264 suggested that we “consider the bacteria.
These are tiny living things made up of single cells far smaller than
the cells in plants and animals....[We] can, by properly designing
these tiniest slaves of ours, use them to reshape the world itself and
build it close to our hearts’ desire.” More importantly, Donaldson161
elaborated on his earlier discussion2262 of how cryonically suspended
human beings might be repaired. He extended the earlier concepts
of Ettinger160 and White,2259 concluding that “with such hybrid
technology as micro-miniature biological-mechanical machines the
size of viruses” and related technology, “it seems unlikely that (to
repair a single cell) there would be any difficulty at all in principle
to carrying out any imaginable repair.” He estimated that about 10
programmable cell-repair biomachines could be introduced into a
cell that was under repair without causing too much mechanical
disruption. In 1988, Donaldson1724 described artificial macrophages
that “can carry control machinery to recognize target cells, responding
only to them, or responding differently depending upon cell type
or cell conditions. They can still work even if the target cell isn’t
functioning (unlike viruses), rebuild target cell machinery other than
the genes, and transfer many more genes up to an entire copy of the
patient’s genome.” They can also “communicate with one another
[and] release diffusible chemicals to guide one another’s behavior.”
By the 1990s, bioengineered viruses of various types and certain
other vectors were routinely being used in experimental genetic
therapies3001-3011 as a means to target and penetrate certain cell
populations, with the objective of inserting therapeutic DNA
sequences into the nucleus of human target cells in vivo. Retrovirallyaltered lymphocytes (T cells) began to be injected into humans for
therapeutic purposes. Another example of an engineered cell in
therapeutics was the use of genetically modified cerebral endothelial
cell vectors to attack glioblastoma, which was being pursued by
Neurotech (in Paris) in 1998. Engineered bacteria were being pursued
by Vion Pharmaceuticals in collaboration with Yale University.3038 In
their “Tumor Amplified Protein Expression Therapy” program,
antibiotic-sensitive Salmonella typhimurium (food poisoning) bacteria
were attenuated by removing the genes that produce purines vital
to bacterial growth. The tamed strain (cell line VNP20009) could
not long survive in healthy tissue, but quickly multiplied ~1000-
fold inside tumors, which are rich in purines. The next step would
be to add genes to the bacterium to produce anticancer proteins
that can shrink tumors, or to modify the bacteria to deliver various
enzymes, genes, or prodrugs for tumor cell growth regulation. The
engineered bacteria were available in multiple serotypes (Section
8.5.2) to avoid potential immune response in the host. Phase I
human clinical trials were expected to begin in 1999 using clinical
dosages produced in 50-liter fermenters, and other possible bacterial
vector species were being examined.
Micro-biorobotics was still regarded by many in the biotechnology
community as a highly speculative topic in 1998. Glen A. Evans3014
described the possible construction of synthetic genomes and artificial
organisms. His proposed strategy involves determining or designing
the DNA sequence for the genome, synthesizing and assembling the
genome, introducing the synthetic DNA into an enucleated pluripotent host cell, then introducing the host cell into an organism.
Evans foresees the high throughput “read-out” of gene products
discovered through genomic sequencing, rapid construction of
designer genes and genomes, automated designer vector synthesis
for gene replacement/insertional mutagenesis, and finally the construction of synthetic genomes and artificial organisms. Robert
Bradbury3015 has considered requirements and costs for genome
synthesis and replacement. For example, Bradbury estimates genome
synthesis costs by assuming a projected ~$0.03/base for DNA
synthesis (compared to ~$0.80-$1.00/base-micromole in 1999),
with ~20,000 expressed genes per biorobotic cell with an average
gene size of ~3000 bases, giving a ~60 megabase expressed genome
per biorobotic cell (1 chromosome) and a raw synthesis cost of ~$3
million per designer cell line (excluding design costs). There has also
been discussion of “chemical reaction automata” as precursors
for synthetic organisms,3016 synthetic lifeforms3263 and
“nanobiology”,3017 “biorobotics”,3079-3081 “cell rovers”,3241 microbial
engineering,1962,3248,3543,3544 lymphocyte engineering,965 and artificial
chromosomes (Chapter 20), and cell engineering (Chapter 21) is
rapidly gaining popularity.
1.3.2.2 The Mechanical Tradition
The late science fiction author Robert A. Heinlein155 nearly
invented the concept of molecular nanotechnology in 1942 when
he suggested a process for manipulating microscopic structures. Heinlein
envisioned the extensive use of life-size teleoperator hands, called
“waldoes,” complete with sensory feedback for full, remote-controlled
telepresence. His fictional hero, Waldo, used a collection of these
mechanical teleoperated hands for building and operating a series
30 Nanomedicine • Volume I
of ever-smaller sets of such mechanical hands. The smallest
mechanical hands, “hardly an eighth of an inch across,” were
equipped with micro-surgical instruments and stereo “scanners,”
and were used to “manipulate living nerve tissue, [to examine] its
performance in situ,” and to perform neurosurgery. Eric Frank
Russell’s 1947 story “Hobbyist” described a fabrication process with
“atom fed to atom like brick after brick to build a house.” In 1955,
Russell’s serial “Call Him Dead,” also published in Astounding
Science Fiction, had a virus-based alien intelligence that spread
through contact with blood or saliva; the story features a
“microforger,” a man who makes “surgical and manipulatory
instruments so tiny they can be used to operate on a bacillus.” Also
in the mechanical tradition, Isaac Asimov’s “Fantastic Voyage”339,340 in
1966 took its miniaturized human crew in a miniaturized submarine
through the bloodstream of a human patient on a mission of repair.
Heinlein, Russell, and Asimov overlooked the full implications
of their ideas, and most scientists were unsympathetic — for
example, in 1952 Erwin Schrodinger wrote that we would never
experiment with just one electron, atom, or molecule.3197 But by
the early 1960s, several scientists had reinvented similar approaches
to micromanipulation and miniaturization, this time extending their
reach into the nanotechnology domain. The first and most famous
of these scientists was the Nobel physicist Richard P. Feynman. In
his remarkably prescient 1959 talk “There’s Plenty of Room at the
Bottom,” Feynman156 proposed employing machine tools to make
smaller machine tools, these to be used in turn to make still smaller
machine tools, and so on all the way down to the atomic level.
Feynman prophetically concluded that this is “a development which
I think cannot be avoided.” Such nanomachine tools, nanorobots
and nanodevices could ultimately be used to develop a wide range
of submicron instrumentation and manufacturing tools, i.e.,
nanotechnology. Feynman’s suggested applications for these tools
included producing vast quantities of ultrasmall computers and various micro- and nano-robots.
Feynman was clearly aware of the potential medical applications
of the new technology he was proposing. After discussing his ideas
with a colleague, Feynman offered the first known proposal for a
nanomedical procedure to cure heart disease: “A friend of mine
(Albert R. Hibbs) suggests a very interesting possibility for relatively
small machines. He says that, although it is a very wild idea, it would
be interesting in surgery if you could swallow the surgeon. You put
the mechanical surgeon inside the blood vessel and it goes into the
heart and looks around. (Of course the information has to be fed
out.) It finds out which valve is the faulty one and takes a little knife
and slices it out. Other small machines might be permanently
incorporated in the body to assist some inadequately functioning
organ.”156 Later in his historic lecture, Feynman urged us to consider
the possibility, in connection with biological cells, “that we can
manufacture an object that maneuvers at that level!”
In 1961, K.R. Shoulders2265 rejected the use of biological building
blocks, even though biological “processes do work, and they can do
so in a garbage can without supervision.” He saw them as too limited
environmentally and too difficult to control with available technology.
Instead, he sought to directly produce much simpler, more powerful
and rugged nanostructure arrays, operating at video frequency rates,
which in turn could ultimately aid in their own replication. In 1965,
Shoulders2266 reported the actual operation of micromanipulators
able to position tiny items with 10 nm accuracy while under direct
observation by field ion microscopy.
In 1970, Volkenstein2267 noted that “the creation of a
nonmacromolecular system which would act as a model for living
organisms is definitely possible” but could not arise by itself, and
that the macromolecularity of present organisms is not essential,
but due to their evolutionary origins. Taking some poetic license,
he added: “Consequently, the cybernetic nonmacromolecular
machine, which simulates life, could have been and can be created
on earth only by man. Then it could perfect itself without limits.”
T. Nemes2268 discussed artificial self-replicating machines and
described how to construct “an automatic lathe able to reproduce
itself,” a concept apparently developed before von Neumann’s work
on machine replication.1985
In 1981, Drexler182 suggested the construction of mechanically
deterministic nanodevices using biological parts; these devices could
inspect cells at the molecular level and also repair cellular tissues
that had been damaged during cryonic suspension. In 1982,
Drexler311 described cell repair machines even more clearly in the
mechanical tradition, in a popular publication.
By 1983, Drexler2253 began privately circulating a draft technical
paper entitled “Cell Repair Machines” which investigated for the
first time, in some detail, whether an advanced mechanical-based
nanotechnology would “permit construction of systems of molecularscale sensors, computers, and manipulators able to enter and repair
cells; the nature of the computational algorithms and magnitude of
the computational resources needed to guide repairs; and the physical
capabilities and constraints important to the repair process [in
order to] sketch the conceptual design of a cell repair system based
on a mature molecular technology.”
Peterson2254 notes that “medical applications were explored by
Drexler during the early 1980s but the medical community was not
ready for the concept.” A technical paper by Drexler, invited by an
editor at the Journal of the American Medical Association, was dismissed
by a referee as “science fiction.”
In 1985, G. Feinberg2269 proposed using short-wavelength
coherent laser energy to power and communicate with “nanosensors
that could be implanted into the human body. They
could...[monitor] various physiological functions from subcellular
molecules up through tissues and organs...essential in determining
some of the mechanisms involved in growth and aging.”
In a 1985 book entitled Robotics, edited by Marvin Minsky (a
well-known computer scientist and artificial intelligence pioneer),
Minsky briefly described how fully-automatic cellular repair
machines might work, following Drexler’s vision:
“Suppose that we could design a repair machine so small that it could
repair an artery from the inside! The first such machines might be the
size of fleas. (There is room for a great deal of machinery in something
the size of a flea — as the body of the flea itself testifies.) These
micromachines could crawl into all but the smallest blood vessels, clear
out debris, and reline the walls with suitable materials yet to be
invented. Later generations of micromachines could be even smaller,
perhaps no larger than the body cells they repair. These minuscule
machines would be mass-produced by the billions, either by larger
machines or by techniques of making them reproduce themselves. Perhaps
these biological janitors would even be implanted in our bodies to
remain there as permanent maintenance workers, just like many biological
cells that already serve such purposes.”
“Today the idea of such a technology may seem fantastic, yet many of
the circuits in our computers are already smaller than many of our bodies’
cells. Let’s try, for a moment, to look ahead to: mass production of highly
intelligent machines; gigantic advances in miniaturization; a technology so
advanced that these machines reproduce themselves without our help.
Fantastic? Not at all. Even the simplest algae and bacteria can do that.
True, they’re not intelligent, but each of them contains enough computerlike
machinery and memory to do those things. So, to build bacteria-size
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 31
computers should be perfectly feasible, once we have the necessary
microtechnology. Some day we’ll have the means to build artificial, cell-like
machines with all those capabilities.” 202
R.A. Freitas Jr.204 also contributed a chapter to Minsky’s 1985
book, offering the following suggestion for remote-controlled
incisionless nanosurgery: “One possibility is the concept of remotecontrolled medical mites made feasible by modern micromachinery
technology. Some medical mites would be like microminiature
submarines, released inside the human body for internal sensing.
Other mites could float, crawl, or swim through major arteries in
the human body and perform on-site repairs from within, controlled
by radio link under direction of a skilled telemicrosurgeon.”
In 1986, Drexler published Engines of Creation,
8 a popular text
with two chapters devoted to discussions of cellular repair machines.
Drexler further expounded upon the topic of cellular repair
machines in articles published in 1985,259 1986,310 1987,165 and
1989,72 and his concepts were described by Brian Wowk in 1988261
and in a Time-Life book in 1989.2256 Cellular repair machines are
explored at length in Chapter 21.
In 1988, A.K. Dewdney18 reported an early nanomedical concept
of an artery-cleaning nanorobot that he attributed to Drexler,
accompanied by an artist’s conception with the caption “a
nanomachine swimming through a capillary attacks a fat deposit.”
(A preferable nanorobotic design for this purpose, the endotheliocyte,
is presented in Chapter 22.)
1.3.2.3 Nanomedicine in the 1990s
Despite the tremendous importance of molecular
nanotechnology, a published 1993 literature review of robotics in
health care included not a single reference to nanotechnology or to
nanomedicine.2255 At this writing in 1998, the list of original
post-1989 technical and popular nonfiction works that deal with
nanomedical topics in the mechanical tradition is short enough to
permit virtually an exhaustive listing, including Beardsley,122
Bova,2973 Coombs and Robinson,570 Crawford,2270 Drexler,9,10,2397
DuCharme,358 Emanuelson,3270 Fahy,27,215,224,322,2271 Fiedler and
Reynolds,70 Freitas,19,2300,1400 Kaehler,2272 Klatz and Kahn,2979
Kurzweil,2309 Lampton,168,330 Merkle,258,262,306,888 Merrill,3487
Minsky,132 More,2992,2993 Ostman,2284 Reifman,2273 and Wowk and
Darwin.20 The first nanomedical device design technical paper was
published in 1998 by Freitas in the biotechnology journal Artificial
Cells,
1400 and the present trilogy (Nanomedicine) is the first book-length
technical treatment of the medical implications of molecular
nanotechnology.
The author again must caution enthusiasts that the full capabilities
of these machines will not be realized without a great deal of sweat
and toil by legions of well-funded and dedicated researchers working
for many decades to develop the technology. One purpose of this
book is to help motivate this future work.
1.3.3 Biotechnology and Molecular Nanotechnology
Some pragmatic readers may be wondering what is so special
about molecular nanotechnology, that existing or anticipated biotechnology could not accomplish just as well? After all, biotechnology
is already an established medical capability. It has real applications
and real products already on the market. Reflecting upon the future
possibility of sophisticated mechanical medical nanorobots equipped
with powerful nanocomputers, in 1989, one well-known cryobiologist215 mused that “what is not clear is just what need we would
have for such devices.” The simplest answer, suggested by Figure
1.5, is that each of the three contemporary branches of
“nanotechnology” offers something of unique value to the practice
of medicine.
Nanoscale materials technology3221,3222,3262 has already found widespread use in medicine, including biocompatible materials and
analytical techniques,341 surgical and dental practice, nerve cell
research using intracellular electrodes, biostructures research and
biomolecular research using near-field optical microscopy, scanningprobe microscopy and optical tweezers, and vaccine design,570 and
also many 20th century bulk chemical and biochemical manufacturing
techniques along with much of classical pharmacology.
As for “biotechnology,” the original meaning of this word contemplated “the application of biological systems and organisms to
technical and industrial processes”.2223 In recent times, the field has
expanded to include genetic engineering and now takes as its ultimate
goal no less than the engineering of all biological systems, even
completely artificial organic living systems, using biological
instrumentalities.
The third branch, molecular nanotechnology, takes as its purview
the engineering of all complex mechanical systems constructed from
the molecular level — potentially offering new tools for medical
practice, the principal subject of this book. Observes G.M. Fahy,2271
“the difference between nanotechnologists and biotechnologists is
that the former do not restrict themselves to the biological limitations
of the latter, and they are much more ambitious about the kinds of
accomplishments that they want to achieve.”
Doctors can utilize solutions to medical problems from all three
approaches. As noted earlier, 80-90% of medical complaints resolve
themselves via natural homeostatic processes, or without the necessary
involvement of active biotechnological or molecularnanotechnological agents. But by employing biotechnology, the
range and efficacy of treatment options greatly increases. With
molecular nanotechnology, the range, efficacy, comfort and speed
of possible medical treatments again expands enormously. Molecular
nanotechnology is essential when the damage to the human body is
extremely subtle, highly selective, or time-critical (as in head traumas,
burns, or fast-spreading diseases), or when the damage is very
Fig. 1.5. Three contemporary branches of “nanotechnology.”
32 Nanomedicine • Volume I
massive, overwhelming the body’s natural defenses and repair
mechanisms.
Table 1.4, inspired by an earlier discussion from G.M. Fahy,215
makes these options more explicit. At every difficulty level, most
classes of medical problems may be resolved with varying efficacy within
the homeostatic/nanomaterials, biotechnological, or molecularnanotechnological approaches. As the chosen technology
becomes more precise, active, and controllable, the range of
options broadens and the quality of the options improves. Thus the
question is not whether molecular nanotechnology is required to
accomplish a given medical objective. In many cases, it is not —
though of course there are some things that only biotechnology and
molecular nanotechnology can do, and some other things that only
molecular nanotechnology can do. Rather, the important question
is which approach offers a superior solution to a given medical
problem, using any reasonable metric of treatment efficacy. For
virtually every class of medical challenge, a mature molecular
nanotechnology offers a wider and more effective range of treatment
options than any other approach.
It is quite possible to imagine an advanced biotechnology that
uses an engineered white cell, fibroblast, or macrophage chassis,
energized by native oxygen and glucose (Section 6.3.4) and modified
mitochondrial powerplants, driven by pseudopodia, cilia or flagella
(Section 9.4), communicating and navigating via biochemical signals
(Sections 7.2.1 and 8.4.3), and even incorporating onboard digital
biocomputers (Section 10.2.3) to make microscopic biorobots.
Principal arguments favoring the biotechnology approach for medical
purposes are: (1) that we are already somewhat familiar with such
systems, after half a century of intensive molecular biology research;
(2) that we have already “built” precursor systems, such as a whole
living amoeba constructed from five distinct parts,159 bioengineered
viruses3003 and bacteria2018,3038 as DNA insertion devices, and natural
replication stimulated in genetically engineered starter microbes;
(3) that biocompatibility will not be a major issue since fibroblasts
(which express no HLA Class II antigens, hence stimulate no rejection
response; Section 8.5.2.1) could be used as the starter material; (4)
that both engineered viruses2326,2327 and bacteria are already in wide
commercial and research use; and (5) the greater complexity of selfrepair in mechanical systems, should it be needed. Many believe
that the development pathway to early biorobots may be considerably
shorter than for the mechanical nanorobots of the molecular
nanotechnology approach, for which in 1998 not a single working
prototype yet existed, even in research laboratories.
It is also possible to imagine a molecular nanotechnology that
uses mechanical nanorobotic systems. Such systems will have many
constitutional differences from biological-based systems. For
instance, mechanical systems will transport parts, materials, energy
and instructions via fixed channels, whereas most (but not all)
biological systems operate by diffusion.2244 Mechanical systems will
have structures constrained by specific geometries, whereas biological
systems have structures defined by patterns of containment and
interconnection — the shape of a membrane compartment in a cell
matters less than its continuity and the contents of the volume it
defines.2244 Mechanical systems will be deterministically manufactured
by operations analogous to manual construction, whereas engineered
ribosomes will self-assemble via diffusion and stochastic matching
of complementary parts;2244 in other words, biology uses recipes,
while mechanical systems use blueprints.2022 Cells grow, with their
Homeostatic Molecular
Level Specific Medical or Nanomaterials Biotechnology Nanotechnology
of Difficulty Challenge Technology Approach Approach
I Minor Symptoms and Herbal preparation, minor Symptomatic suppression Pharmacytes, zippocytes,
Minor Physical Trauma surgery, passage of time pharmacology respirocytes, etc.
II Infectious Agents Natural immune system Antibiotics and vaccines Nanobiotics
III Mutation and Cell Disease Natural immune system Molecular diagnostics and Nanobiotics
Major surgery treatments; gene therapies Cell repair machines
IV Health Maintainance Vitamins, good diet, exercise, Gene therapy to enhance Whole-body cyto-assay
and Aging moderation and “clean living” self-repair and immune function Cell repair machines
V Major Organ Replacement Organ transplantation Stem cell & tissue engineering; Cell mills, tissue mills,
or Repair Major surgery embryonic gene reactivation organ mills, nanosurgery
VI Morpho-Engineering Cosmetic surgery Control of natural morphogenetic Nanosurgery
systems Chromatin editors
VII Emergency Care; Restoration Emergency major surgery Biological repair nets Traumapods
of Nonhomeostatic Tissue Prosthesis or bionics Bioengineered immune cells Warm biostasis
VIII Augmentation of Natural Prosthesis or bionics Cross-species and artificial Cell engineering devices
Structure or Function morphogenetic supplementation Autogenous control
Table 1.4. Medical Challenges of Increasing Difficulty and Possible Approaches
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 33
parts adapting to one another; mechanical nanorobots may be
constructed from parts of fixed structure.2244 Biology uses selfrepair; mechanical systems generally do not2022 — largely because
self-repair (by component exchange) will not be needed in molecular
mechanical systems, whose designs may be made more simple by
relying upon high component redundancy10 (Chapter 13). These
and other differences imply a number of important advantages that
mechanical-based medical systems will enjoy over biological-based
medical systems, which, taken together, strongly suggest that predominantly mechanical nanosystems may be the approach of choice
for a mature medical nanotechnology. The advantages of molecular
nanotechnology (e.g. the mechanical tradition) are many:
1. Speed of Medical Treatment — Doctors may be surprised by
the incredible quickness of nanorobotic action when compared to
the speeds available from fibroblasts or leukocytes. Normal
homeostatic processes such as dermal wound repair via natural
fibroblasts may require weeks to run to completion. Typical
fibroblast movements occur at 0.1-1 microns/sec (Section 9.4), but
mechanical nanomanipulators can operate at 1-10 cm/sec speeds
(Section 9.3.1) or faster, a speed advantage of 4-5 orders of magnitude.
Even the strongest biological fibers (e.g. intermediate filaments) have
a failure strength 3 orders of magnitude below the strongest
mechanical fibers (e.g. fullerene nanotubes; Table 9.3). Biological
cilia beat at ~30 Hz while mechanical nanocilia may cycle up to
~20 MHz, though practical power restrictions and other considerations
may limit them to the ~10 KHz range for most of the time (Section
9.3.1). Flexible mechanical surfaces can complete a morphing
motion in ~0.1 millisec, compared to the ~100 millisec snapback
time for pinched red cell membrane (Section 5.3.1.4), again a
thousandfold advantage in speed. Thus we expect that mechanical
therapeutic systems can reach their targets up to ~10,000 times faster,
all else equal, and treatments which require ~105 sec for a biological
system may need only ~102 sec for a mechanical system;3233 tachyiatria
improves both patient and physician comfort. In either biological
or mechanical systems, large numbers of devices of comparable
physical size (e.g. ~microns) may be employed to do the work, so
numbers alone cannot offset the mechanical speed
advantage.
2. Power Density and Transduction — Biological cells typically
employ power densities of 103
-104 W/m3
, with maximum densities
of ~106 W/m3 in honeybee flight muscle cells and bacterial flagellar
motors (Table 6.8). By contrast, nanomechanical power systems can
produce power densities of 109
-1012 W/m3 (Section 6.3), an
advantage of 103
-108 for mechanical over biological systems. By
1998, conducting polymer-based actuators generated 20-100 times
the force for a given cross-sectional area as mammalian skeletal
muscle.2388 Additionally, amoebic locomotion in motile cells
requires diffusion-limited cytoskeletal disassembly and reassembly
to achieve movement; mechanical motility systems may employ
simple cable-pulling, winches, or ratchets, which are faster and more
direct. Some biological energy transducers are reversible, but muscle
contraction is irreversible — not only cannot muscle actively
re-expand, but stretching it doesn’t make it produce much useful
chemical energy. In contrast, electric motors can be run backwards
to generate electricity, forcing pistons makes them pump, and
loudspeakers can be used as microphones.2022
3. Superior Building Materials — Typical biological materials have
tensile failure strengths in the 106
-107 N/m2 range, with the strongest
biological materials such as wet compact bone having a failure
strength of ~108 N/m2
, all of which compare poorly to ~109 N/m2
for good steel, ~1010 N/m2 for sapphire, and ~1011 N/m2 for diamond
and carbon fullerenes (Table 9.3), again showing a 103
-105 advantage
for mechanical systems that use nonbiological materials.
Nonbiological materials can be much stiffer, permitting the
application of higher forces with greater precision of movement,
and they also tend to remain stable over a larger range of temperature,
pressure, salinity and pH. Proteins are heat sensitive in part because
much of the functionality of their structure is due to noncovalent
bonds involved in folding, which are broken more easily at higher
temperatures; in diamond, sapphire, and many other rigid materials,
structural shape is covalently fixed, hence is far more temperaturestable. Most proteins tend to become dysfunctional at cryogenic
temperatures, unlike diamond-based mechanical structures (Section
10.5). Biomaterials are not ruled out for all nanomechanical systems,
but represent only a small subset of the materials that can be used in
nanorobots. Mechanical systems can employ a wider variety of
atoms and molecular structures in their design and construction,
with novel functional forms that might be difficult to implement in
a biological system such as steam engines (Section 6.3.1) or nuclear
power (Section 6.3.7). As another example, an application requiring
the most effective bulk thermal conduction possible should use
diamond, the best conductor available, not some biomaterial with
inferior thermal performance.
4. Nondegradation of Treatment Agents — Diagnostic and therapeutic agents constructed of biomaterials generally are biodegradable
in vivo, although there is a major branch of pharmacology
devoted to designing drugs that are moderately non-biodegradable
— anti-sense DNA analogues with unusual backbone linkages and
peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) are difficult to break down. However,
suitably designed nanorobotic agents constructed of nonbiological
materials are not biodegradable. An engineered fibroblast may not
stimulate an immune response when transplanted into a foreign
host, but its biomolecules are subject to chemical attack in vivo by
free radicals, acids, and enzymes. Even “mirror” biomolecules or
“Doppelganger proteins”2285 comprised exclusively of unnatural
D-amino acids have a lifetime of only ~5 days inside the human
body.2286 Nonbiological materials such as diamond and sapphire
are highly resistant to chemical breakdown or leukocytic degradation
in vivo, and pathogenic biological entities cannot easily evolve useful
attack strategies against these materials (Section 9.3.5.3.6).
5. Control of Nanomedical Treatment — Present-day biotechnological entities are not programmable and cannot be switched on
and off conditionally during task execution. A digital biocomputer,
while possible in theory, represents a considerable conceptual
departure from the usual biological paradigm. Even assuming that
a digital biocomputer could be installed in a fibroblast, and that
appropriate effector mechanisms could be attached, such a system
would necessarily have slower clock cycles, less capacious memory
per unit volume, and longer data access times, implying less diversity
of action, poorer control, and less complex executable programs
than would be available in nanoscale electromechanical computer
systems (Section 10.2). The mechanical approach emphasizes precise
control of action, including control of physical placement, timing,
strength, structure, and interactions with other (especially biological)
entities. The biological approach emphasizes the use of poorly
controlled natural structures, needlessly sacrificing huge blocks of
the available functionality and design space.
6. Nanodevice Versatility — Mechanical systems can readily
incorporate biological elements if necessary, but artificial biological
34 Nanomedicine • Volume I
systems can incorporate nonbiological materials such as carbon
nanotubes or diamond/sapphire structural elements only with
difficulty, in part because biology has a more limited repertoire
of “effector” mechanisms. Artificial biological systems cannot easily
incorporate nonbiological materials where desired because natural
biological assembly methods make no provisions for these materials
either in the coded instructions in DNA or in the attachment
chemistries. Rebuilding or reconstructing the human body with
nonbiological components (e.g. fullerene encabled bone for bone
damaged in an accident; Chapters 24 and 30), or augmentation of
human body function with unnatural abilities or features (e.g.
autogenous paracrine control; Chapter 12), will be very difficult or
impossible to achieve using purely biotechnological means.
7. Avoiding Overspecialization — M. Krummenacker notes that
one of the most glaring shortcomings of bacteria and other naturally
occurring molecular machinery — when viewed as systems subject
to further engineering — is the rather limited range of molecular
substrates they can utilize. For example, bacterial enzymes are highly
specialized devices, with very narrow substrate specificities. Thousands
of different enzymes are needed in each organism, and the substance
classes capable of digestion are limited to some sugars, various amino
acids including proteins that can be degraded by excreted proteases,
lipids, and a few other smallish oxygen-functionalized carbon molecules
such as glycerol and ethanol. Some bacteria can metabolize CO2
and a handful of aromatic compounds, but there is a vast range of
organic chemicals that most bacteria cannot degrade or manufacture.
A much smaller set of substantially more general molecular tools
can probably be designed using the mechanical approach;
mechanosynthesis can fabricate and assemble, or disassemble, a far
wider range of molecular structures than are available to the cellular
machinery of life.
8. Faster and More Precise Diagnosis — The analytic function of
medical diagnosis requires rapid communication between the
injected devices and the attending physician. If limited to chemical
messaging, biotechnology devices will require minutes or hours to
complete each diagnostic loop. Nanomachines, with their more
diverse set of input-output mechanisms (Chapter 7), can outmessage
the results of in vivo reconnaissance or testing literally in seconds.
Such nanomachines can also run more tests of greater variety in less
time. Mechanical nanoinstruments, including molecule-by-molecule
disassemblers (Chapter 19), will make comprehensive cell mapping
and cell interaction analysis possible. Bacterial resistance can be
assayed at the molecular level, allowing new treatment agents to
more easily be composed, manufactured and immediately deployed
(Chapter 19).
9. More Sensitive Response Threshold for High-Speed Action —
Unlike natural systems, an entire population of nanobiotic
devices can be triggered globally by just a single local detection of
the target antigen or pathogen. The natural immune system takes
>105 sec to become fully engaged after exposure to a systemic pathogen
or other antigen-presenting intruder. A biotechnologically enhanced
immune system that can employ the fastest natural unit replication
time (~103 sec for some bacteria) will require ~104 sec for full
deployment post-exposure. By contrast, a nanobiotic immune system
(Chapter 19) can probably be fully engaged (though not finished)
in at most two blood circulation times, or ~102
 sec.3233
10. More Reliable Operation — Engineered macrophages would
probably individually operate less reliably than mechanical
nanorobots. Many pathogens, such as Listeria monocytogenes and
Trypanosoma cruzi, are known to be able to escape from phagocytic
vacuoles into the cytoplasm;2165 while biotech drugs or cell manufactured proteins could be developed to prevent this (e.g. cold
therapy drugs are entry-point blockers), nanorobotic trapping
mechanisms can be more secure (Section 10.4.2). Proteins assembled
by natural ribosomes typically incorporate one error per ~104 amino
acids placed; current gene and protein synthesizing machines utilizing
biotechnological processes have similar error rates. A molecular
nanotechnology approach will improve error rates by at least a
millionfold10 (Chapter 20). Mechanical systems can also incorporate
sensors to determine if and when a particular task needs to be done,
or when a task has been completed. Finally, it is unlikely that natural
organisms will be able to infiltrate mechanical nanorobots or to
co-opt their functions. By contrast, a biological-based robot could
be diverted or defeated by microbes that can piggyback on its
metabolism, interfere with its normal workings, or even incorporate
the device wholesale into their own structures, causing the engineered
biomachine to perform some new or different function than was
originally intended. There are many examples of such co-option
among natural biological systems, including the protozoan
mixotrichs found in the termite gut that have assimilated bacteria
into their bodies for use as motive engines,2025-2027 and the nudibranch
mollusks (marine snails without shells) that steal nematocysts (stinging
cells) away from coelenterates such as jellyfish (i.e. a Portuguese
man-of-war) and incorporate the stingers as defensive armaments
in their own skins,2295 a process which S. Vogel2022 has called “stealing
loaded guns from the army.”
11. Verification of Progress and Treatment — Using a variety of
communication modalities, nanorobots can report back to the
attending physician, with digital precision, a summary of diagnostically- or therapeutically-relevant data describing exactly what
was found, and what was done, and what problems were encountered, in every cell visited. A biological-based approach relying upon
chemical messaging is necessarily slow with limited signaling
capacity. Also unlike mechanical nanorobots, biotechnological
systems generally cannot monitor their own functions while working,
and, except for a few highly specialized DNA proofreading systems,
cannot directly inspect their work while it is in progress or after it is
finished.
12. Minimum Side Effects — Almost all drugs have side effects,
such as conventional cancer chemotherapy which causes hair loss
and vomiting, although computer-designed drugs (Chapter 18) have
high specificity and relatively few side effects. Carefully tailored cancer
vaccines under development in the late 1990s were
expected unavoidably to affect some healthy cells. Even well-targeted
drugs are distributed to unintended tissues and organs in low
concentrations,1492 although some bacteria can target certain
organs fairly reliably without being able to distinguish individual
cells. By contrast, mechanical nanorobots may be targeted with
virtually 100% accuracy to specific organs, tissues, or even individual
cellular addresses within the human body (Chapter 8). Such
nanorobots should have few if any side effects, and will remain safe
even in large dosages because their actions can be digitally selfregulated using rigorous control protocols (Chapter 12) that
affirmatively prohibit device activation unless all necessary preconditions have been, and continuously remain, satisfied. G.M.
Fahy2271 has noted that these possibilities could transform “drugs”
into “programmable machines with a range of sensory, decisionmaking, and effector capabilities [that] might avoid side effects and
allergic reactions...attaining almost complete specificity of
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 35
action....Designed smart pharmaceuticals might activate themselves
only when, where, and if needed.” Additionally, nanorobots may be
programmed to excuse themselves from the site of action, or even
from the body, after a treatment is completed; by contrast, spent
biorobotic elements containing ingested foreign materials may have
more limited post-treatment mobility, thus lingering at the worksite
causing inflammation when naturally degraded or removed.*
13. Reduced Replicator Danger — Drexler2244 points out that living
systems are evolved systems, while nanomechanical replicators would
be designed: “The former are shaped to serve the goal of their own
survival and replication in a natural environment, whereas the latter
will be shaped (whether well or poorly) to serve human goals, perhaps
in an artificial environment.” Genetic engineering involves not
design of replicators from scratch, but tinkering with the molecular
machinery of existing bioreplicators. Since bioreplicators were not
designed, they are not necessarily structured in ways that lend
themselves to complete understanding, and processes based on
diffusion and matching allow complex nonlocal interactions that
can be hard to trace. Bioreplicators can be crippled, but having
evolved in nature, they resemble systems that can survive in nature.
Typically, they are able to exchange genetic information with wild
organisms, raising the possibility of the introduction of new,
unconstrained replicators in the natural environment. Having
evolved to evolve, they have a capacity for further evolution — to
serve their own survival, not human goals.2244 For example, even
when stripped of key pieces of DNA to interfere with its replication
powers, a live attenuated AIDS vaccine can slowly recover its virulence
and can attack immune cells.2939 R. Bradbury suggests that artificial
biorobots could incorporate multiple fail-safe mechanisms including
required external essential nutrients or suicide suppressors, selfdestruct triggers, countdown timers like telomeres, and engineering to
reject foreign DNA (the basis for restriction enzymes), but it
remains logically easier for a system with inchoate capacity to evolve
to resume doing so, than for a system which has never had this
capability to spontaneously develop it.
In contrast, nanomechanical replicators (e.g. assemblers; Section
2.4.2) will be designed from scratch and thus will differ fundamentally
from biological systems. The parts and structures of designed
mechanical systems will be known, and the relationships among
their parts will also be designed and fixed. More important,
nanoreplicators will be fundamentally alien to the biosphere, unrelated
to anything that has evolved to survive in nature. Certainly the
capacity to fail can appear by accident, and emergent capabilities
cannot be completely ruled out, but engineering experience shows
that the ability to perform complex organized activities (such as
replication in a natural environment) does not normally appear
spontaneously.2244 Also, and purely as a geometrical consideration,
adding a new part inside a densely organized geometric structure
(as would be found in a nanomachine) typically requires changes in
the relative positions of many other parts, and hence corresponding
adjustments in design. Adding a part inside a densely organized
topological structure (as found in living systems) typically leaves
topologies unchanged — room can be made by stretching and shifting
other parts, with no change in their essential design,2244 hence
permitting easier modification to biological structures by exogenous
agencies.
Note that mechanical medical nanodevices need not be capable
of replication. There is no requirement for replication in vivo; such
replication would be needlessly dangerous, and adding this capability
would reduce effectiveness in carrying out the primary medical task.
Analogously, viral vectors employed in genetic therapies are modified
to be “incapable” of replication.
14. Assured Patentability — Microscopic biorobots, unavoidably
derived from natural biological material, may someday be deemed
unpatentable under a general prohibition on “genetic colonialism”
or other emerging legal doctrines.2323 In contrast, mechanical
nanorobots, being fully-artificial and designed machines, should
always be patentable provided they satisfy the customary legal criteria.
1.3.4 Naturophilia
As already noted (Section 1.3.1), living things in general and the
human body in particular are awesome examples of a powerful and
intricately woven natural molecular technology to which human
engineers, in 1998, still aspire. But embracing Nature is not the
same as finding her perfect. Today, the word “natural” has acquired
a strong connotation of rightness, even of sanctity. For most of
human history, notes biologist Steven Vogel,2022 “the natural and
human worlds stood opposed. Nature was something to be tamed
and utilized; we had the ordinary attitude of organisms toward other
species. Nowadays the natural world intrudes far less but gets
venerated far more. And why not? When one’s meat is bought in a
store, when locusts don’t threaten one’s corn crop, when central
heating and plumbing are the norm, the aesthetics of nature hold
greater appeal.” And so we embrace the natural rectitude or moral
superiority of nature’s ways, a kind of pantheism which may be called
ethical naturalism,2299 biophilia,2296 or naturophilia.
Many great minds have fallen prey to naturophilia. In the 4th
century BC, Aristotle wrote2297 that “if one way be better than
another, that you may be sure is Nature’s way.” In the 15th century,
we have from Leonardo da Vinci:2298 “Human ingenuity may make
various inventions, but it will never devise any inventions more
beautiful, nor more simple, nor more to the purpose than Nature
does; because in her inventions nothing is wanting and nothing is
superfluous.”
However, as Virginia Postrel notes in The Future and Its
Enemies:
2299 “If nature is itself a dynamic process rather than a static
end, then there is no single form of `the natural.’ An evolving,
open-ended nature may impose practical constraints, but it cannot
dictate eternal standards. It cannot determine what is good. The
distinction between the artificial and the natural must lie not in
their source — human or not — but in their characteristics, in the
way they relate to the world around them.”
According to the dictionary, “artificial” usually means “made by
man, rather than occurring in nature.” More usefully, Herbert
Simon2301 defines the artificial as that which is designed, expresses
goals, and possesses external purposes. The artificial is controlled
and serves its creators’ purposes, subject to the universal laws of
physics. Kevin Kelly381 defines the natural as “out of control.”
Natureis evolved, not designed, and serves no goal or external purpose
save its own survival. Nature, lacking intent, is amoral — it simply
is.2299 By building the artificial, observes Postrel, “we do not overthrow
nature, but cooperate with it, using nature’s own art to create new
*R. Bradbury notes that artificial eukaryotic biorobots may possess an apoptotic pathway (Section 10.4.1.1) which could be activated to permit clean and natural selfdestruction that avoids inflammation in surrounding tissues. Artificial prokaryotic biorobots could also be designed for human biocompatibility; by replacing bacterial genes
with generic human genes, such a device may be undetectable to the immune system.
36 Nanomedicine • Volume I
natural forms. Our artifice alters the path of nature, but it does not
end it, for nature has no stopping point, no final shape. It is a process,
not an end.”
Some naturophilist writers have decried the increasing
“medicalization of society” in which formerly natural functions have
come to be regarded as medical conditions requiring intervention
or treatment.2204,2302-2308 However, history suggests that naturophilia
is usually undermined by any new medical technology that offers
clear, safe, and immediate benefits to patients. For example, prior
to 1842, intense pain was viewed as the natural outcome of being
cut with a scalpel during surgery. It had always been so — how
could it ever be otherwise? The invention of anesthesia in 1842
(Section 1.2.1.9.2) suddenly altered this natural outcome and
replaced it with a less painful artificial outcome, despite anguished cries
from naturophiles within the medical community that eliminating pain
might somehow diminish the human character.
Another example of a widely-accepted medicalization of normal
function is childbirth, a quite natural activity that can nevertheless
be very dangerous to the mother’s health. Precise prehistoric death
rates are unknown, although archeological evidence shows that
Neandertal females tended to die before the age of 30 due to hazards of
childbirth.2339,2340 In the worst 19th century maternity hospitals
the natural death rate from childbirth was 9-10%, falling to a very
artificial 0.4% rate in England by 1930 and to less than 0.01% in
the U.S. during the 1990s. As a result, it now seems “natural” for a
woman always to survive childbirth, even though the reverse may
have been true for most of human history. Warns historian Roy
Porter:2204 “We should certainly not hanker after some mythic golden
age when women gave birth naturally, painlessly, and safely; the
most appalling Western maternal death rate today is among the Faith
Assembly religious sect in Indiana, who reject orthodox medicine
and practice home births; their perinatal mortality is 92 times greater
than in Indiana as a whole.”
A disease seems “natural” to those who suffer from it when no
treatment exists. But once a treatment is discovered and is widely
employed, the disease becomes rare and its absence now becomes
“natural.” To those in the past, writes K.E. Drexler,9 “the idea of
cutting people open with knives painlessly would have seemed
miraculous, but surgical anesthesia is now routine. Likewise with
bacterial infections and antibiotics, with the eradication of smallpox,
and the vaccine for polio: each tamed a deadly terror, and each is
now half-forgotten history. What amazes one generation seems
obvious and even boring to the next. The first baby born after each
breakthrough grows up wondering what all the excitement was
about.” In the next century, says Charles Sheffield,343 “our descendants
will look on angiograms, upper and lower GIs, and biopsies the way
we regard the prospect of surgery without anesthetics.”
Future generations who take for granted an all-pervasive
nanomedicine in their lives may look aghast upon the 20th century,
wondering among other things how we managed to retain productive
focus given the constant annoyance of our numerous undiagnosed
minor disease states. Most of these diseases are not yet recognized as
such, and many are still regarded as “natural” and not worthy of
treatment. In a few decades, this may change. Some examples:
1. Addictions — In 1998, many people laugh off seemingly
harmless addictions to chocolate (chocoholics), fats or sugar (sweet
tooth), food (gluttony), nicotine (smokers), caffeine (coffee and cola
drinkers), work (workaholics), exercise (runner’s high), telling falsehoods
(pathological liars), gambling (wagerphilia), stealing (kleptomania),
medical treatments (hypochondria), marriage (polygamy), powerseeking (domination), skydiving or bungee-jumping (thrillseeking),
superstition (astrology), shopping (spendoholics), driving cars that
kill 40,000 Americans per year (mobilophilia), unusual sexual preferences (bestiality), sexual activity (nymphomania, satyriasis), or pregnancy (gravidophilia). Without making any value judgements, it is
highly likely that most or all of these addictions have genetic or
physiological components which, once properly modified, can greatly
reduce or eliminate the addiction if so desired. Many on the list are
already suspected to have genetic components, much like schizophrenia, drug abuse, bulimia, and alcoholism (dipsomania).
2. Allergies and Intolerances — A food allergy2997 is an allergic
reaction to a particular food, although true food allergies are much
rarer than is generally believed.1604 In the cases of milk, eggs, shellfish,
nuts, wheat, soybeans, and chocolate, sufferers may lack an enzyme
necessary for digesting the substance. In other cases, dust particles,
plant pollens, pet danders, drugs, or foods may be allergens for natural
IgE-mediated immunosensitivity. Intolerance, a much more common
condition, is any undesirable effect of eating a particular food,
including gastrointestinal distress, gas, nausea, diarrhea, or other
problems. Urticaria (hives), angioedema and even mild anaphylaxis
are common reactions to various drugs, insect stings or bites,
allergy shots, or certain foods, particularly eggs, shellfish, nuts and
fruits. Physical allergies to ordinary stimuli such as cold, sunlight,
heat, pollen, pet dander, or minor injury can produce itching, skin
blotches, pimples, and hives.
3. Minor Physical Annoyances — In a world where most major
medical maladies are readily treated, numerous minor medical
conditions which today escape our notice will rise up from
obscurity and present themselves annoyingly to our conscious minds,
demanding attention. These conditions may be of several kinds.
First is cosmetics, including small moles, freckles and blemishes on
the skin; broken fingernails or unevenly-growing cuticles; minor
skin reddenings or pimples; old childhood scars, wrinkled skin, birthmarks or stretch marks; unwanted hair growth in unusual places, or
differential hair color or texture growing in patches; fingerprint
patterns that are aesthetically unappealing; and mismatched leg
lengths, hands with different left/right ring sizes, an asymmetrical
face, or lopsided breasts. Second is minor aches and pains, which may
include headaches; eyebrow hairs trapped in the eyeball conjunctiva;
bent-hair pain (folliculalgia); dyspepsia; creaking limb joints and
stomach growling; ingrown nails and hairs; earwax plugs and temporary tinnitis; chapped lips, canker sores and heat rashes; stuffy nose
or gritty eyes upon rising in the morning; dermal chafing marks
from elastic bands in clothing; minor flatulence; PMS (premenstrual
syndrome); a leg or arm “falling asleep” in certain postures; nervous
tics, itches, and twitches; uncracked knuckles, stiff neck, or backache;
blocked middle ear following descent from high altitude; restless
leg syndrome (akathisia); rotationally-induced dizziness, as on an
amusement park ride; or rock-and-roll neck, wherein active musical
performers or listeners bob their heads violently, rupturing small
blood vessels in the neck. Third is minor physical or functional flaws,
such as poor stream during male urination, female papillary leakage,
colorblindness, snoring, unpleasant body odors, nosebleeds, declining
visual or aural acuity, handedness (currently ~90% dextromanual,
~10% sinistromanual,3136,3137 mild strabismus (eyeball misalignment),
bad moods (neurotransmitter imbalances), or post-intoxication
hangover.
4. Undiscovered Infectious Agents — Peptic ulcers once were
thought to result from a stressful life, a purely natural response to a
lifestyle choice. Then it was found that the major cause of ulcers is the
Basic Capabilities • The Prospect of Nanomedicine 37
presence of Helicobacter pylori bacteria in the stomach. Bacteria have
been implicated in some cases of atherosclerosis2970 and Alzheimer’s
disease,2971 and nanobacteria have been proposed as possible
nucleation sites for kidney stones.2149 Other seemingly natural but
undesirable conditions may also be due to undiscovered microbial
agents,3237 especially since bacteria outnumber tissue cells in our
highly infested 20th century bodies by more than 10:1 (Section
8.5.1).
5. Unwanted Syndromes — Syndromes are groups of related
symptoms and signs of disordered function that define a disease
whose cause remains unknown, that is, idiopathic. A good
example is irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), which affects up to 20%
of the adult U.S. population and includes symptoms of abdominal
distention and pain, with more frequent and looser stools. Many
are unaware they are afflicted. In 1998 there was no known cause or
simple complete treatment for this still “natural” disease.3713-3717
Even more mysterious than IBS is our general activity level — some
people seem to have high-energy personalities, while others have
more phlegmatic low-energy personalities. Either may be regarded
as “natural,” but nanomedicine can probably bring this ill-defined
neurophysiological variable under human control. The need to sleep
is another imperfectly understood syndrome. It is experienced by
everyone and thus was universally regarded as “natural” in the 20th
century. Physiological short sleepers2122 were unusual, insomnia or
asomnia3273 was thought of as an abnormal state, and there were a
few anecdotal but medically undocumented instances of total
nonsomnia, such as the celebrated case of Al Herpin.2312
6. Psychological Traits — Psychological traits which, if identified
by a patient as undesirable, might be subject to genetic or physiological
modification could include: sexual preference (6-10% of the adult
population is homosexual);1604 shyness or boldness;2332 acquisitive
or altruistic propensity; misanthropy or philanthropy; theistic or
atheistic orientation; loquacity or dourness; childhood imprinting;
criminal propensity (up to 1-5% of the population); various recognized personality disorders that affect ~10% of the population2122
such as antisocial, paranoid, schizotypal, histrionic, narcissistic,
avoidant, dependent, obsessive-compulsive, and passive-aggressive
disorders; panic attacks (experienced at least once by ~33% of all
adults each year);1604 and phobic disorders such as social phobias
(~13% of the population), specific phobias including fear of large
animals (zoophobia), snakes (ophidiophobia), spiders
(arachnophobia), needles (belonephobia,3272 ~10%), the dark
(noctiphobia or scotophobia), or strangers (xenophobia) (total
~5.7%), the fear of blood or hemophobia (~5%), agoraphobia
(~2.8%),1604 and other unusual phobias2223 such as the fears of certain
colors (chromophobia), daylight (phengophobia), girls
(parthenophobia), men (androphobia), stars in the sky
(siderophobia), the number thirteen (triskaidekaphobia), and even
the fear of developing a phobia (phobophobia).
The above sampling of minor afflictions, almost all considered
“natural” in 1998, may come to be regarded as commonplace
correctable medical conditions in the nanomedical era. By the time
such petty annoyances are deemed worthy of immediate treatment,
biotechnology and nanomedicine already will have defeated the most
fearsome illnesses of the late 20th century2310 and will have moved
on to other challenges.2311,2864,2973 Naturophiles may dissent, but
the emerging trend from medical biotechnology is to characterize
health, not as a static standard, but rather as a condition defined by
the lives that people want to lead. Affirming the volitional normative
model of disease (Section 1.2.2), Virginia Postrel concludes:2299
“Different goals will produce different choices about trade-offs and
standards. What makes a condition unhealthy is not that it is unnatural
but that it interferes with human purposes. Revering nature [would
mean] sacrificing the purposes of individuals to preserve the world as
given. It [would require] that we force people to live with biological
conditions that trouble them, whether diseases such as cystic fibrosis or
schizophrenia, disabilities such as myopia or crooked teeth, or simply
less beauty, intelligence, happiness, or grace than could be achieved
through artifice. In a world where it’s no big deal to take hormone
therapy, Viagra, or Prozac, to have a face lift, or to know a child’s sex
before birth, a world in which even such radical interventions as sexchange operations and heart transplants have failed to turn society upside
down, it is extremely difficult to argue that medical innovations are
dangerous simply because they fool Mother Nature.”
1.4 Background and Brief Overview of This Book
The publication of Nanosystems10 in 1992 laid a strong technical
foundation for the field of molecular manufacturing. Such technology
was already known to have major implications for medicine.8,9 Still
lacking, however, was an overview and synthesis of the interactions
between molecular machine systems and living systems, particularly
human living systems.
With Nanosystems as the intellectual cornerstone, research on
Nanomedicine, originally intended to be a single volume, began in
1994. It quickly became clear that the field of nanomedicine would
be even more interdisciplinary than molecular manufacturing, in
part because of the many essential interfaces between mechanical
nanosystems and living systems. This realization prompted ramification of the book into multiple volumes, allowing the field to be
defined from diverse technical orientations. Additionally, the need
to consider all major aspects of nanomedical device design and
operations demanded a substantial increase in the intended length
of the work, a regrettable but necessary circumstance for which the
author apologizes in advance.
As a result, Nanomedicine has become a three-volume technical
work with 31 chapters. Its intended audience is technical and
professional people who are seriously interested in the future of
medical technology. The three Volumes build upon each other
cumulatively. The first Volume, now complete, describes basic
capabilities common to all medical nanodevices, and the physical,
chemical, thermodynamic, mechanical, and biological limits of such
devices. Its primary audience is physical scientists, chemists, biochemists, and biomedical engineers engaged in basic research. The
second Volume, still in progress, deals with aspects of device control
and configuration, biocompatibility and safety issues, and basic
nanomedical components and simple systems. Its primary audience
is systems and control engineers, research physiologists, clinical
laboratory analysts, biotechnologists, and biomedical engineers
doing applied research. The third Volume, also in progress, discusses
specific treatments for specific conditions and injuries, using
nanomedical technology in the context of clinical (e.g. doctor-patient)
situations. Its primary audience is clinical specialists and research
physicians, and interested general practitioners.
The first molecular assemblers (Chapter 2) may be able to build
only very simple nanomechanical systems, possibly only from very
highly ordered substrates with significant rate-limiting intermediate
steps, and only in very small numbers, so the earliest functional
nanomachines may be laboratory curiosities. As assembler technology
slowly improves, progressively more complex and capable
nanomachines will be manufactured in vastly larger numbers. This
book primarily investigates the rational design and operation of these
more complex and capable nanomachines, and assumes that cubic
centimeter quantities (e.g. ~1012 micron-sized nanorobots) will not
38 Nanomedicine • Volume I
be unreasonably expensive to manufacture (Section 2.4.2) and thus
can be therapeutically deployed routinely by future doctors.
Volume I of Nanomedicine, Basic Capabilities, describes the set
of basic capabilities of molecular machine systems that may be
required by many, if not most, medical nanorobotic devices. These
include the abilities to recognize, sort and transport important
molecules (Chapter 3); sense the environment (Chapter 4); alter
shape or surface texture (Chapter 5); generate onboard energy to
power effective robotic functions (Chapter 6); communicate with
doctors, patients, and other nanorobots (Chapter 7); navigate
throughout the human body, i.e. determining somatographic or
cytographic location within vessels, organs, tissues, or cells (Chapter
8); manipulate microscopic objects and move about inside a
human body (Chapter 9); and timekeep, perform computations,
disable living cells and viruses, and operate at various pressures and
temperatures (Chapter 10).
Volume II of Nanomedicine, Systems and Operations, considers
system-level technical requirements in the design and operation of
medical nanodevices. Part 1 describes aspects of nanomedical
operations and configurations, including scaling factors and general
design principles (Chapter 11); control issues including teleoperation
and haptic controllers, swarm motions, autogenous control systems,
and various operational protocols (Chapter 12); repair, replacement,
and reliability issues (Chapter 13); and molecular machine systems
design issues such as tradeoffs between special-purpose and general
purpose architectures, and deployment configurations such as nanoorgans, medical utility fogs, and replicators (Chapter 14). Part 2 deals
with a multitude of issues involving clinical safety and performance,
specifically medical nanorobot biocompatibility including immunoreactivity and thrombogenicity (Chapter 15); methods of
nanorobotic ingress and egress from the human body (Chapter 16);
and possible nanodevice failure modes, environmental interactions,
side effects of nanomedical treatments, iatrogenic factors, nanodevice
software bugs, and other safety issues (Chapter 17). Part 3 summarizes
various classes of medical nanosystems, including instruments, tools,
and diagnostic systems (Chapter 18); specific medical nanorobot
devices (Chapter 19); rapid mechanical reading and editing of
chromatin and protein macromolecules (Chapter 20); and various
complex nanorobotic systems that will make possible advanced
cytopathology and cell repair, tissue and organ manufacturing, and
personal defensive systems (Chapter 21).
Volume III of Nanomedicine, Applications, describes the full range
of nanomedical applications which employ molecular
nanotechnology inside the human body, from the perspective of a
future practitioner in an era of widely available nanomedicine. Proofof-concept designs for whole nanodevices, artificial nano-organs,
and nanomedical treatments include rapid cardiovascular repair
(Chapter 22); treatments for pathogenic disease and cancer, with
epidemiological considerations (Chapter 23); responses to various
physical traumas, burns and radiation exposures, and new methods
of first aid, surgery, and emergency or critical care (Chapter 24);
neurography, spinal restoration and brain repair (Chapter 25);
improved nutrition and digestion (Chapter 26); sex, reproduction,
and population issues (Chapter 27); cosmetics, recreation, veterinary
and space medicine (Chapter 28); the control of aging processes,
eliminating most causes of death prevalent in the 20th century, and
strategies for biostasis (Chapter 29); and human augmentation systems
(Chapter 30). The Volume concludes with a discussion of the
sociology of nanomedicine, regulatory issues, nanotechnology
implementation timelines, and some speculations on the future of
hospitals, pharmaceutical companies, and the medical profession
(Chapter 31).
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 2
Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing
2.1 Is Molecular Manufacturing Possible?
Most contemporary industrial fabrication processes are based
on “top-down” technologies, wherein small objects are
sawn or machined from larger objects, or small features
are imposed on larger objects, in either case by removing unwanted
matter. The results of such processes may be small, such as
micron-featured integrated circuits, or very large, such as jet aircraft, but in most cases the material is being processed in chunks far
larger than molecular scale.
Molecular manufacturing, on the other hand, represents a
“bottom-up” technology. Desired products will be built directly by
“assembler” machines, molecule by molecule, making larger and
larger objects with atomic precision. The results of such processes
may also be very small or very large, much as biology builds both
micron-sized bacteria and 100-meter tall sequoia trees. However,
since assemblers add matter only where it is intended, little need be
removed and hence there may be minimal waste during the process.
By guiding with precision the assembly of molecules and supramolecular structures, such a manufacturing system could construct
an extraordinarily wide range of products of unprecedented quality
and performance.
In 1959, the Nobel physicist Richard P. Feynman156 observed
that:
“The principles of physics, as far as I can see, do not speak against the
possibility of maneuvering things atom by atom. It is not an attempt to
violate any laws; it is something, in principle, that can be done; but, in
practice, it has not been done because we are too big . . . Ultimately, we
can do chemical synthesis.”
“A chemist comes to us and says, “Look, I want a molecule that has the
atoms arranged thus and so; make me that molecule.” The chemist does
a mysterious thing when he wants to make a molecule. He sees that it
has got that ring, so he mixes this and that, and he shakes it, and he
fiddles around. And, at the end of a difficult process, he usually does
succeed in synthesizing what he wants.”
“But it is interesting that it would be, in principle, possible (I think) for
a physicist to synthesize any chemical substance that the chemist writes
down. Give the orders and the physicist synthesizes it. How? Put the
atoms down where the chemist says, and so you make the substance. The
problems of chemistry and biology can be greatly helped if our ability to
see what we are doing, and to do things on an atomic level, is ultimately
developed—a development which I think cannot be avoided.”
Nearly 40 years after Feynman’s famous “Plenty of Room at the
Bottom” speech, and a decade after Drexler’s original proposal8-10
for a bottom-up approach to machine-building using molecular
assemblers, Nobel chemist Richard Smalley also largely agreed that
this objective should prove feasible. Noted Smalley:2389 “On a length
scale of more than one nanometer, the mechanical robot assembler
metaphor envisioned by Drexler almost certainly will work...”
Many skeptical questions arise when one first encounters the
ideas of molecular nanotechnology and molecular assemblers
(Section 2.4.2). It is useful to keep in mind the proven feasibility of
such systems in the biological tradition (Section 1.3.2.1) over
billions of years of natural evolution. In one sense, molecular
nanotechnology will be a refinement and expansion upon how nature
works at the molecular scale. Nature’s examples, such as human
beings, certainly answer the most basic skeptical questions, such as:
Can macroscopic objects be built from molecular scale processes?
(Yes, thanks to cellular replication.) Are molecular objects stable?
(Of course; the human population alone contains >1029 reasonably
stable and quite functional ribosomal “nanomachines”). Observes
Nobel chemist Jean-Marie Lehn:765 “The chemist finds illustration,
inspiration and stimulation in natural processes, as well as confidence
and reassurance since they are proof that such highly complex systems
can indeed be achieved on the basis of molecular components.”
What about quantum effects? The uncertainty principle makes
electron positions somewhat fuzzy, but the atom as a whole has a
comparatively definite position set by the relatively great mass of
the atomic nucleus. The quantum probability function of electrons
in atoms tends to drop off exponentially with distance outside the
atom, giving atoms a moderately sharp “edge”. Mathematically, the
positional uncertainty of a single carbon atom of mass mC = 2 x 10-26
kg bound in a single C-C bond of stiffness10 kC = 440 N/m may be
crudely estimated from the classical vibrational frequency νC = (kC/
mC)
1/2 = 1.5 x 1014 Hz. This sets the zero-point vibrational bond
energy EC = h νC / 2 = 4.9 x 10-20 J = kC ∆XC
2 / 2 where h = 6.63 x
10-34 J-sec (Planck’s constant) and ∆XC ~ 0.015 nm is the maximum
classical amplitude of the bound carbon atom (roughly the same as
the 3 dB point for the gaussian wavefunction, notes J. Soreff). Thus
∆XC is just ~5% of the typical atomic electron cloud diameter of
~0.3 nm, imposing only a modest additional constraint on the fabrication and stability of nanomechanical structures. (Even in most
liquids at their boiling points, each molecule is free to move only
~0.07 nm from its average position.)2036
How about the effects of Brownian bombardment on nanomachines? Describing a nanomechanical component as a harmonic
oscillator embedded in a gas, Drexler10 notes: “At equilibrium, an
impinging gas molecule is as likely to absorb energy as to deliver it,
and so molecular bombardment has no net effect on the amplitude
of vibration. How a system is coupled to a thermal bath can
affect its detailed dynamics, but not the statistical distribution
of dynamical quantities.” Nanomachines must also obey the laws
40 Nanomedicine • Volume I
of thermodynamics. Nanorobots cannot be used as a “Maxwell’s
demon”2349,2350—energy must be expended to do useful work; there
can be no free lunch.2611
Will high-energy radiation damage nanomachines? Radiation can
break chemical bonds and disrupt molecular machines.8 The annual
failure rate for a properly designed ~1 micron3 molecular machine
(containing many billions of atoms) can be made as low as several
percent.10This estimate is derived from a consideration of all known
thermal, photochemical, radiation, and other damage mechanisms,
but the dominant error mechanism that appears difficult to
substantially reduce is damage caused by background radiation.
Failure rates are not zero, but are nonetheless remarkable by today’s
standards (Chapter 13), especially given error detection and correction
at the module level.
During nanodevice fabrication, the problems of crossbonding
and reactive intermediates pose additional constraints that must be
dealt with using appropriate assembler designs. Specifically, assemblers
with rigid positioning components operating in vacuo can restrict
reactive intermediates and molecular tool tips to desired locations
with a precision of at least ~0.1 nm (Section 9.3.1.4), or slightly less
than an atomic diameter. Within the confines of an evacuated or
“eutactic” assembler workspace, the location of every structural atom
may be known to within the uncertainty created by thermal noise.
Internal structural components may possess relatively high stiffness,
so positional uncertainty caused by thermal noise may be small. In
the classical analysis, positional variance ∆X2 = kT / ks, where k =
1.381 x 10-21 J/kelvin (Boltzmann’s constant), T is temperature in
kelvins, and ks is component stiffness, typically ≥10 N/m for
nanometer-scale diamondoid components,10 hence the standard
deviation of component position is ~0.02 nm at room temperature,
or ~0.01 nm at cryogenic (e.g., LN2) temperatures. By employing
sufficiently stiff mechanisms the position of every structural atom
in the system can be known to within a fraction of an atomic diameter
with high reliability and without the need for explicit positional
sensing.* Steric tool hindrance—in molecular manufacturing, the
conical volume occupied by a tool tip or manipulator platform—is
a technical design problem that may be overcome by using
sufficiently stiff tools or multi-tip tools, working in vacuo.
Additionally, while some synthetic methods might involve the
manipulation of individual atoms by appropriate tools, such as the
hydrogen abstraction tool which removes a single selected hydrogen
atom from a diamondoid surface (Section 2.3.3), other reactions
will involve small clusters of atoms or larger molecular components
(Section 2.4.1).
What about friction2896 and wear among nanomechanical
components? Properly designed molecular machines lack wear
mechanisms, although other damage mechanisms remain.2243 Dry
bearings with atomically precise surfaces can have negligible static
friction3243 and wear, and very low dynamic friction or drag.10
Nanomechanical components are better viewed as moving smoothly
in a force field than as sliding subject to friction. For example, total
drag power dissipated by an isolated molecular sleeve bearing of
radius 2 nm spinning at 1 MHz is dominated by band-stiffness
scattering, amounting to ≤0.000004 picowatts (pW) (Eqn. 6.4),
very small compared to the 1-1000 pW power draw that will be
typical of micron-size medical nanorobots (Section 6.5.3). The strong
precise surfaces of nanomachines experience no change during a
typical operational cycle, hence zero wear. Within the single-point
failure model (Chapter 13), the first step in a wear process (e.g., a
dislocated atom) is regarded as fatal, hence cumulative wear plays
no role in determining device lifetimes.10 In eutactic nanomachines,
contaminants of all kinds are rigorously excluded. The equivalent
of wear particles cannot appear until the device has failed. On this
scale, repulsive fields provide “lubrication” and an oil molecule would
be a contaminant object, not a lubricant.
The general conclusion is that molecular nanotechnology violates
no physical laws. In 1998, it was generally accepted that molecular
nanotechnology will be developed, although there remains some
disagreement about how long it will take. To progress from today’s
limited capabilities to the complex nanorobots described later in
this trilogy will clearly require a great deal of research and development
effort. Still, the proper question is no longer “if” but “when.” This
Chapter presents a few of the many possible technical paths leading
to a working molecular assembler that were being discussed in 1998.
The reader is strongly urged to consult the most current literature
for the latest results. Section 2.2 briefly summarizes the conventional
top-down approaches to nanotechnology. Section 2.3 describes several
possible direct bottom-up pathways to molecular manufacturing
including biotechnology, supramolecular chemistry, and scanning
probes. Gimzewski and Joachim3200 note that “bottom-up approaches
to nanofabrication may one day compete with conventional
top-down approaches in providing nanotechnologies for the next
millenium. Top-down refers to increasing miniaturization through
extension of existing microfabrication schemes, [whereas] the
bottom-up scenario is one of ever-increasing complexity at the
molecular level while maintaining control on an atom-by-atom basis”.
Section 2.4 surveys molecular mechanical components and design
work on molecular assemblers and molecular manufacturing systems
from the perspective of 1998.
2.2 Top-Down Approaches to Nanotechnology
Nanotechnology was first proposed by Nobel physicist Richard
Feynman in December 1959, in a talk156 in which he also issued a
seemingly “impossible” challenge to build a working electric motor
no larger than a 1/64th-inch (400-micron) cube, backed by a $1000
prize to spur interest in the new field. Just 11 months later, engineer
William McLellan had constructed a 250-microgram 2000-rpm
motor out of 13 separate parts and collected his reward.300,355
(McLellan’s entire motor is only as big as the period at the end of
this sentence.)355 In 1995, a $250,000 Feynman Grand Prize
(Section 2.4.2) was made available, this time sponsored by the
Foresight Institute, for any engineer who could build the first
programmable nanometer-scale robotic arm. How long will it take
for history to repeat?
In his famous 1959 talk, Feynman proposed the prototypical
top-down strategy for building complex nanomachinery—essentially
a completely teleoperated machine shop, including mills, lathes,
drills, presses, cutters, and the like, plus master-slave grippers to
allow the human operator to move parts and materials around the
workshop.
To build a nanomachine using Feynman’s scheme, the operator
first directs a macroscale machine shop to fabricate an exact copy of
itself, but four times smaller in size. After this work is done, and all
machines are verified to be working properly and as expected, the
reduced-scale machine shop would be used to build a copy of itself,
another factor of four smaller but a factor of 16 tinier156 than the
original machine shop. This process of fabricating progressively
smaller machine shops proceeds until a machine shop capable of
manipulations at the nanoscale is produced. The final result is a
nanomachine shop capable of reconstructing itself, or of producing
*Medical nanorobots may be built to atomic precision, but once built and deployed such devices often will not perform molecularly precise movements during normal functions
and may frequently rely upon sensor-based motion control; Section 9.3.3.
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 41
any other useful nanoscale output product stream that is physically
possible to manufacture, using molecular feedstock.
As Feynman describes the process:156
“When I make my first set of slave hands at one-fourth scale, I am going
to make ten sets. I make ten sets of hands, and I wire them to my original
levers so they each do exactly the same thing at the same time in parallel.
Now, when I am making my new devices one-quarter again as small, I
let each one manufacture ten copies, so that I would have a hundred
hands at the 1/16th size....If I made a billion little lathes, each 1/4000th
the scale of a regular lathe, there are plenty of materials and space available
because in the billion little ones there is less than two percent of the
materials in one big lathe. It doesn’
t cost anything for materials, you see.
So I want to build a billion tiny factories, models of each other, which
are manufacturing simultaneously, drilling holes, stamping parts, and
so on.”
“As we go down in size, there are a number of interesting problems that
arise. All things do not simply scale down in proportion. There is the
problem that materials stick together by the molecular (van der Waals)
attractions. There will be several problems of this nature that we will
have to be ready to design for....[But] if we go down far enough, all of
our devices can be mass produced so that they are absolutely perfect
copies of one another. We cannot build two large machines so that the
dimensions are exactly the same. But if your machine is only 100 atoms
high, you only have to get it correct to one-half of one percent to make
sure the other machine is exactly the same size—namely, 100 atoms
high!”
Progress is being made on Feynman’s top-down approach in a
relatively new engineering field known as Micro Electro-Mechanical
Systems or MEMS, originally an extension of chip-etch technology
rather than micromanipulation. Conventional purely-electronic
devices fabricated on silicon chips with ~0.2 micron features must
be coupled to external systems to produce mechanical effects, but
MEMS devices integrate mechanical components directly with
electrical circuitry. Thus while microelectronic chips merely route
electrons, microelectromechanical systems give the electronics
immediate access to control applications, enabling single
microdevices to interact directly with the physical world.
Generic microsystems research has proven to be a rewarding
activity for two decades, with each successively smaller motor or
machine widely publicized.2865 The field gathered momentum after
the first working micromotors were demonstrated in the late 1980s
by groups at Berkeley and MIT. By 1990, tiny electrostatic motors
with 100-micron rotors displayed operating speeds of ~250 Hz556
and operating lifetimes of ~106 revolutions.2363 A new Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering appeared in 1991, followed
by the Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems in 1992 and the
first MEMS Application Symposium in Tokyo in June 1996. By the
mid-1990s, Sandia’s Microelectronics Development Laboratory,2356 one
of the most prominent vendors of micromachines, could
mass-produce planar micromechanical devices smaller than ~1 mm2
,
incorporating motors with gears and cogs each no thicker than a
human hair and turning at speeds of >4000 Hz. Wobble micromotors
such as those fabricated in silicon by the University of Utah’s
micromachine lab demonstrated very little friction or abrasion, with
measured operating lifetimes in excess of 300 million revolutions.2366
(Diamond coatings could further reduce friction by an order of
magnitude over silicon,2545 and the wear rate of polycrystalline
diamond is known to be ~104
 times lower than for silicon.)2852
MEMS research has produced multi-micron-scale accelerometers,2382-2384 diverse microsensors (e.g., blood pressure microsensors
attached to cardiac catheters), microscale cantilevers and jointed crank
mechanisms,2380 5-micron barbs,2371 flow microvalves and pressure
microtransducers,544,2373micropistons and micropumps,2373 microgear
trains,2379 microactuators545 and piezo-driven micromotors,2381
micromirrors and microshutters,546,1062,1974 Fresnel lens
microarrays,2374 microgyroscopes,1383 a 2-mm long combustion
chamber suitable for turbine use2377 (making possible a 1 cm3
gas-turbine generator that would deliver 50 W of power or 0.2 N of
thrust),2378 and multidevice microsystems2372 that were available
customized or off-the-shelf in mass quantities by 1998. Laser
beams2375 and ion beams2376 were used to carve ~300-micron
diameter gears with 50-micron wide teeth in solid diamond.
Microelectrodeposition and microcontact printing readily produced
topologically complex 3-D microstructures with 1-10 micron
feature sizes.2364 Colloidal templating yielded 0.7-1 micron diameter
hollow silica spheres with wall thicknesses from tens to hundreds of
nanometers,2368 10-25 nm trenches,2357 or 4-nm thick graphite sheet
layers tiled on spherical surfaces ~0.2 microns in diameter.2369 A
CAD/CAM desktop micromanufacturing system invented at
Lincoln Laboratory in Lexington, MA, machined three-dimensional
structures, including spheres, in silicon, using computer-controlled
laser/chemical etching of cubic-micron voxels at the rate of ~20,000
voxels/sec.2367
By 1998, smaller (~100 nm) accelerometers were being developed
by such companies as Analog Devices in the U.S. and Daimler-Benz
in Germany, and electronic control systems such as microswitches
and microrelays were available commercially from several companies
including Integrated Micromachines of California. Micromachining
was a well-developed engineering discipline.2696 Westinghouse Science
and Technology Center used MEMS sensors to build a miniaturized
mass spectrometer. Micro-opto-mechanical systems were under
development. Chemists were proposing121 and building1222,1228
Integrated Chemical Synthesizers consisting of millimeter to
micron-sized chemical reactors, designed for specific applications,
along with associated devices for moving reactant and product
streams (pumps), mixing reactants (reaction chambers), analyzing
streams, and separating products (separation chambers), constructed
conventionally using silicon substrates and photolithographic
techniques to form the desired structures but also utilizing the high
selectivity of biological molecules such as enzymes and antibodies
to fabricate sensors. MEMS had also led to the development of
microgrippers that could manipulate individual 2.7-micron polystyrene spheres, dried red blood cells of similar size, and various
protozoa.1267 Market Intelligence Research Corp. of Mountain View,
CA, estimated a total worldwide budget for micromachine research
and development of $995 million in 1992 and over $3 billion by
1998.357 Systems Planning Corporation of Arlington, VA, projected
that the microsystems industry could be worth more than $14 billion
annually by 2001.1259
Some MEMS research followed surprising directions. For example,
in the mid-1990s MEMS engineers at the University of Tokyo
Department of Mechanical Engineering fabricated an 8-hinge,
8-plate wing microstructure capable of independent flight through
the air.1573-1576,2353 The structure was fabricated by traditional silicon
micromachining techniques and was then released from the wafer
surface, with the initially flat sections lifted into flight position using a
micromanipulation system with glass probes several microns in
diameter. Each wing was ~500 microns square; applying 300 VAC
at 10 KHz caused resonant vibration and the flapping amplitude of
the wings exceeded 30˚.2353 In another 4-wing configuration,1574
the flapping resonance frequency was ~150 Hz and the device freely
flew up and down a thin glass pole when placed in an alternating
electromagnetic field. Another bi-wing design made of magnetized
nickel coated silicon measuring 2000 x 10,000 microns successfully
42 Nanomedicine • Volume I
flew without power supply cables and guides in the manner of a
butterfly or mosquito, when an alternating magnetic field strength
of >400 oersted and 12 Hz was applied;1576 a similar device with
320 x 800 micron wings also flew in a 300 Hz magnetic field.1575
“If we release the silicon mosquito from the silicon chip, it flies off
and we cannot find it again,” complained researcher H. Miura. “It’s
very small, like dust.” MEMS “gnat robots” have also been described.1250
Using electron-beam (e-beam) lithography, in 1997 researchers
at the Cornell University Nanofabrication Facility built what they
believed were the world’s smallest mechanical devices, including a
4-micron-wide Fabry-Perot interferometer and, just for fun, the
world’s smallest guitar, carved out of crystalline silicon and no larger
than a single human cell.2354The “nanoguitar” was 10 microns long
and 2 microns wide, with six strings each ~50 nm (~200 atoms)
wide that would probably resonate at >10-100 MHz if plucked.
Presentation of the nanoguitar enthralled the public, surprising at
least one Cornell researcher (in another lab) who remarked that
“anyone with a sufficiently advanced e-beam lithography system
could make it. I make 50 nanometer silicon objects routinely. Doesn’t
seem like a big deal to me, but evidently most people have no idea
what we’re capable of these days.”
Direct-write e-beam lithography uses a tightly-focused beam of
electrons, steered by electromagnetic deflectors, to trace out patterns
on a wafer resist surface. The electrons chemically alter the resist,
which is then etched away, leaving the desired pattern. By 1998,
e-beam spot sizes had been focused to less than 1 nm, and 5-nm
beam widths were routine, although forward scattering of the electrons
imposed a limit of resist exposure resolution of ~10 nm for
e-beams2358 and ~5 nm for focused ion beams.1259 E-beam writing
times were very slow—for example, 80 hours were required to carve
a single photolithography mask for a 1G DRAM, though much of
this time was required for proximity calculations by the AI (artificial
intelligence) software [E.A. Rietman, personal communication,
1999] (a better approach is to use a neural net).3012 By 1998, an
electron interferometer containing atomically smooth mirrors spaced
a few atomic layers apart had been fabricated,3183 and in 1999, careful
electron-energy-loss spectroscopy experiments revealed that silicon
dioxide must be at least 4 atoms (~0.7 nm) thick to act as a
conventional electrical insulator.3295
Atom lithography, employing a low-energy neutral atomic beam
(usually Na or Cr) cooled and collimated by optical molasses, then
concentrated at the nodes of the standing wave formed by the
superposition of a laser beam and its reflection, was predicted
also eventually to allow surface deposition of 5-10 nm
features.2355,2370,2838-2841The first directional atomic beam (of sodium)
with a ~0.002 radian beamspread and ~femtogram pulses (~26 million
atoms, or ~(100 nm)3
, per pulse) was demonstrated in early 1999,
with one commentator noting that “the longer dream...is atomic
holography...[that] could combine beams of atoms to build a 3D
solid object”.3173 At the same time, another group achieved a
continuous stream of rubidium atoms lasting up to ~0.1 sec in
duration, with a beam radius potentially as small as ~1 nm.3205
Current-carrying wires have been used to guide cold lithium atoms
“just as optical fibers guide light”;3182 the first curved focusing atom
mirror also was demonstrated in early 1999.2925 By 1998, the
speculative possibility of quantum-mechanical micromanipulation
also had been described.6
Other approaches offered comparable results. For instance,
engineers at the University of Minnesota NanoStructure Laboratory
used nanoimprint lithography (NIL) in 1996 to etch out patterns
of lines, grooves and circles as small as 25 nanometers in a polymer,2357
and by 1998 NIL had been demonstrated in nanoscale
quantum-wire, quantum-dot, and ring transistors with feature sizes
below 10 nm.2358 Nanochannel array glasses containing 33-nm
capillaries arranged in a 2-D hexagonal close packing configuration
at a number density of ~300/micron2 had been available since
1992.2365
Thus by 1998, top-down MEMS techniques could in theory
already make nanoscale (though not atomically precise) parts. Might
these techniques also produce assemblies of such parts, creating
complex machines? Very simple mobile robots of ~1 cm3 volume
were commonplace,2361,2362 so for a more challenging demonstration
of MEMS’ ability to manufacture complete working microrobots,
in 1994 Japanese researchers at Nippondenso Co., Ltd. fabricated a
1/1000th-scale working electric car.2351,2352 As small as a grain of
rice, the micro-car was a 1/1000-scale replica of the Toyota Motor
Corp’s first automobile, the 1936 Model AA sedan (Fig. 2.1). The
tiny vehicle incorporated 24 parts, including tires, wheels, axles,
headlights and taillights, bumpers, a spare tire, and hubcaps carrying
the company name inscribed in microscopic letters, all manually
assembled using a mechanical micromanipulator of the type generally
used for cell handling in biological research (Chapter 21). In part
because of this handcrafting, each microcar cost more to build than
a full-size modern luxury automobile.
The Nippondenso microcar was 4800 microns long, 1800
microns wide, and 1800 microns high, consisting of a chassis, a
shell body, and a 5-part electromagnetic step motor measuring 700
microns in diameter with a ~0.07-tesla magnet penetrated by an
axle 150 microns thick and 1900 microns long. Power was supplied
through thin (18 micron) copper wires, carrying 20 mA at 3 volts.
The motor developed a peak torque of 1.3 x 10-6 N-m (mean 7 x
10-7 N-m) at a mean frequency of ~100 Hz (peak frequency ~700
Hz), propelling the car forward across a level surface at a top speed
of 10 cm/sec. Some internal wear of the rotating parts was visible
after ~2000 sec of continuous operation; the addition of ~0.1
microgram of lubricant to the wheel microbearings caused the
mechanism to seize due to lubricant viscosity. The microcar body
was a 30-micron thick 20-milligram shell, fabricated with features
as small as ~2 microns using modeling and casting, N/C machine
cutting, mold etching, submicron diamond-powder polishing, and
nickel and gold plating processes. Measured average roughness of
machined and final polished surfaces was 130 nm and 26 nm,
respectively. The shell captured all features as small as 2 mm on the
original full-size automobile body. Each tire was 690 microns in
Fig. 2.1. The Nippondenso Microcar—smaller than a grain of rice.
(Photo courtesy of Nippondenso Co., Ltd.)2352
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 43
diameter and 170 microns wide. The license plate was 10 microns
thick, 380 microns wide and 190 microns high. Nippondenso
subsequently used similar manufacturing techniques to build a
prototype of a capsule intended to crawl through tiny pipes in a
power plant or chemical plant like an inchworm, hunting for cracks.
In 1999, three Japanese electronics companies announced the creation
of a 0.42-gram, 5-mm long “ant size” robot reportedly able to lift
0.8-gram loads and to move at ~2 mm/sec, as part of the
government’s ongoing Micro Machine Project.3258
By 1998, micromanipulators with high placement precision had
been demonstrated in various laboratories around the world. For
example, the Spider-II micromanipulation robot employed
bimorphic piezoactuators within a 260-micron cubic work volume
and a three-axis gripper placement accuracy of 8 nm.2359 A
microassembly robot using stick-and-slip actuators had 5-nm
resolution over a 200-nm scanning range with a maximum speed of
4 mm/sec and 0.4% repeatability at 10 KHz, delivering a maximum
driving force of 155 mN and rigidity of 6.3 N/micron.2360
In terms of system size, micromachined MEMS devices (typically
~10-13 m3 in volume) lie exactly intermediate between the macroscale
world (~10-4 m3
) and the nanoscale world (~10-22 m3
). The medical
nanorobots described in this book generally will have dimensions,
precisions, and component part sizes ~1000-fold smaller than the
Nippondenso microcar, which itself was, in turn, ~1000-fold smaller
than a macroscale automobile. It is difficult to see how MEMS
techniques involving statistical materials deposition and removal
could fabricate parts to better than ~10 nm feature sizes or tolerances,
or could position parts during assembly to much better than ~10
nm spatial resolution, nor does it appear likely that MEMS
techniques, on their own, can manufacture or position any structure to
atomic precision. However, this does not rule out the possible use
of MEMS techniques to fabricate crude useful parts for subsequent
“finishing” to atomic precision by other techniques, or to facilitate
the assembly of nanoscale components (of atomic precision or
otherwise) that have been fabricated or subassembled by other means
(Section 2.3).
2.3 Bottom-Up Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing
To manufacture machines of any kind generally requires two
primary capabilities—fabrication of parts, and assembly of parts.
As will be shown below, by 1998 at least a primitive parts fabrication
and parts assembly capability had been demonstrated at the
molecular level using three different enabling technologies:2889
biotechnology (Section 2.3.1), supramolecular chemistry (Section
2.3.2), and scanning probes (Section 2.3.3). This Section reviews
the most preliminary steps and basic approaches to molecular
manufacturing. Consideration of more complex nanoscale components
and assemblies is deferred to Section 2.4. The primary focus here is
on bridging technologies that may lie between what can already be
done and what is desired to be done—specifically, the manufacture
of mechanical nanorobots. The reader is again cautioned that in
1998 this field was experiencing an explosion of interest and
pathbreaking research efforts, so the current literature should be
consulted for the latest results.
2.3.1 Biotechnology
The first broad category of enabling technology for molecular
manufacturing in the mechanical tradition is biotechnology.10,322
Molecular biologists study and modify systems of molecular
machines, and genetic engineers reprogram these systems, sometimes
to build novel molecular objects having complex functions. By 1998,
biotechnologists could make almost any DNA sequence or polypeptide chain desired (though not extremely long aperiodic ones),
assemble “devices” such as artificial chromosomes and viruses, and
were actively pursuing gene therapy, all of which are examples of
molecular engineering. While earlier writers had suggested that
biomolecules could be used as mechanical components,2414
Drexler182 evidently was the first to point out, in 1981, that complex
devices resembling biomolecular motors, actuators, bearings, and
structural components could be combined to build versatile
molecular machine systems analogous to machine systems in the
macroscopic world (Table 1.3). “Development of the ability to
design protein molecules,” Drexler wrote, “will open a path to the
fabrication of devices to complex atomic specifications, thus sidestepping obstacles facing conventional microtechnology. This path
will involve construction of molecular machinery able to position
reactive groups to atomic precision.”
Perhaps the best-known biological example of such molecular
machinery is the ribosome (Fig. 2.2; see also Section 8.5.3.4), the
only freely programmable nanoscale assembler already in existence.*
In nature, ~8000 nm3 ribosomes act as general-purpose factories
building diverse varieties of proteins by bonding amino acids together in precise sequences under instructions provided by a strand
of messenger RNA (mRNA) copied from the host DNA, powered
by the decomposition of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to adenosine
diphosphate (ADP). Each ribosome is a compact ribonucleoprotein
particle consisting of two subunits, with each subunit consisting of
*D. Heidel notes that there are three distinct types of ribosome—eubacterial, archaebacterial and eukaryotic—and multiple subvarieties among the ~108 different species
on Earth; additionally, other bioassembler units such as poly-ketide synthetases3224 also exist but these enzymes generally only make one type of product per assembly.
Fig. 2.2. The ribosome acts as a programmable nanoscale assembler of
protein nanoproducts (redrawn from Ball382).
44 Nanomedicine • Volume I
several proteins associated with a long RNA molecule (rRNA).
Biotechnology can employ the ribosomal machinery of bacteria
to produce novel proteins, which proteins then might serve as
components of larger molecular structures.182
Of course, such biological mechanisms have been disparaged as
“slip-shod devices working in spite of haphazard design.” Dan
Heidel, a University of Washington biomimetics engineer, agrees
that biological systems are sloppy but observes that they are
designed to tolerate it, and offers high praise for the lowly ribosome:
“The average ribosome sits in an aqueous environment surrounded by
thousands of cosolutes at concentrations just a hair’s breadth from
precipitating out of solution. The ribosome itself consists of three RNA
molecules that spontaneously fold into floppy spaghetti noodle piles of
chemically active groups surrounded by >50 proteins of similarly dubious
structure. The other solutes are bombarding this motley assemblage at
tens to hundreds of miles an hour and the solvating water molecules are
a constantly shifting and unpredictable network of hydrogen bonds and
polar ionic charges constantly impinging upon the ribosome. The ribosome
must recognize one particular cognate transfer RNA (tRNA) for the
codon in its A-site out of ~60 other nearly identical tRNAs. This
particular tRNA must be discriminated from all its tRNA brethren
along with whatever other solutes can fit into the A-site pocket using
only three base pairs for discrimination. In fact, most codons use only
two of the three base pairs for recognition so some tRNAs are recognized
by as few as 4 hydrogen bonds. All of this requires sub-Angstrom precision
in the active sites but since the ribosome is a massive complex of subunits held together by only ionic, hydrogen, hydrophobic and Van der
Waals bonds, it’s like getting sub-millimeter accuracy from points on a
bunch of taped-together water balloons being rolled down a staircase.”
“This ridiculous machine can assemble proteins at a 20 Hz
subunit-incorporation frequency with a 10-3 error rate. Ribosomes are
even more impressive when one considers that the number of amino
acids in each ribosome’s own protein subunits combined with the 10-3
protein assembly error rate ensures that each ribosome has several errors
in it and that each cell almost certainly has no two ribosomes exactly
alike. I dare any engineer on this planet to rationally design an assembler at
any scale that is able to operate at a comparable level of performance
under similarly adverse operating conditions.”
Thus ribosomes can manufacture, with >99.9% fidelity to arbitrary
specifications, linear strings of amino acids of great length which
may then fold up to produce three-dimensional protein structures
performing a broad range of highly differentiated functions,
providing good analogs for working nanomachines capable of forming
self-assembling systems. Much of the great diversity of protein
activity flows from the selectivity with which they bind to specific
receptor sites on other molecules. Some of these binding mechanisms
might be copied to construct molecular robotic arms, while other
devices could be made by adapting naturally-occurring proteins, or
by synthesizing new, custom-built ones.2393 Protein engineering
might be used to create proteins with desired qualities as building
blocks for constructing the first primitive assemblers.
The field of protein engineering has its own journal of the same
name, and has already achieved remarkable results in the synthesis
of novel structures. Drexler10 cites the creation of the first de novo
structure by DeGrado,2394 the development of synthetic branched
protein-like structures that depart substantially from protein models,2395
and the engineering of a branched, nonbiological protein with
enzymatic activity.2396 Since then, numerous alpha-helical peptides*
have been designed de novo,2410-2413 a 20-residue artificial peptide
exhibiting designed beta-sheet secondary structure has been created,2398
and various peptide analogs have also been synthesized.2399 By 1998,
advances in computational techniques allowed the design of precise
side-chain packing in proteins with naturally occurring backbone
structures, and the study of de novo backbone structures had begun.2400
The catalytic task space766 was being laboriously investigated at the
molecular level—for example, one study of comparative enzyme
structures revealed that changing as few as four amino acids
converted an oleate 12-desaturase to an oleate hydroxylase, and as
few as six substitutions could convert an oleate hydroxylase into an
oleate desaturase.2401 To further expand the toolkit, Mills2431 and
Fahy322 proposed exploiting the degeneracy of the genetic code
(wherein amino acids are specified by up to 6 different codons;
Chapter 20) by assigning some codons to unnatural amino acids,
allowing the creation of artificial proteins with unprecedented
structural or catalytic properties. With 61 usable codons available,
there is room for up to 41 novel amino acids in addition to the
natural 20 amino acids; unnatural amino acids have been introduced
into beta-lactamase and T4 lysozyme enzymes in a site-directed
fashion, using artificial tRNAs and mRNAs in an in vitro translation
system,2402,2403 and into an engineered peptide as a reporter
group.2412 Additionally, artificial novel base pairs can be incorporated
enzymatically into DNA2404,2607,2932 and other schemes are possible.2676
By incorporating one additional base pair, the number of possible
codons is expanded from 43 = 64 codons to 63 = 216 codons,
potentially allowing up to 193 novel amino acids to be incorporated
into artificial protein structures—or at least 48 new amino acids
assuming that present levels of redundancy are retained and the
existing 4-letter code is kept as a subset for “upward compatibility”.2431
If the genetic alphabet is increased to eight bases (83 = 512 codons),
the number of available codons for novel amino acid-like molecules
increases to as many as 489.322
One of the greatest challenges in protein engineering (where one
objective is to create functional, atomically-precise 3-D aperiodic
structures) has been the difficulty of protein fold design, because
individual amino acids have no strong, natural complementarity.2392
In 1998, Duan and Kollman2324 successfully folded a solvated
36-residue (~12,000-atom) protein fragment (i.e., a peptide) by
molecular dynamics simulation into a structure that resembles an
intermediate native state. During a 1-microsec simulation, the chain
folded during 150 nanosec into a compact structure resembling the
intermediate native state, as known by NMR, then unfolded and
refolded again for a shorter period. In 1998, whole-protein folding
to the final stable native state had not yet been computed deterministically using molecular dynamics—the real protein will fold and refold
hundreds of times before it stumbles into the stable conformation with
the lowest free energy2405—but research pursuing this objective was
active and ongoing.2406,2407 Structural changes that occur during
protein function (e.g., enzymatic action) were also being avidly
studied.2408
A different protein-based approach to near-atomically-precise
3-D structures avoids the folding problem by making use of semirigid protein nanoshells of deterministic size and shape to guide the
ordered assembly of inorganic particles. For example, the capsid of
the cowpea chlorotic mottle virus, a protein container with a 28-nm
external diameter and an 18-nm internal cavity diameter, is
composed of 180 identical coat protein subunits arranged on an
icosahedral lattice. Each subunit presents at least nine basic residues
(arginine and lysine) to the interior of the cavity, creating a positively
charged interior surface which provides an interface for inorganic
crystal nucleation and growth, while the outer capsid surface is not
highly charged. In one experiment,2391 the empty capsid shell was
found to act as a spatially selective nucleation catalyst in paratungstate
mineralization, in addition to its role as a size- and shape-constrained
*Chains of amino acids shorter than ~100 residues are customarily called peptides; longer chains are proteins.
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 45
reaction vessel. Noted the authors: “The range of viral morphology
and size allow great flexibility for adapting this methodology to control
the size and shape of the entrapped material, which is limited only
by access to the protein interior and could include inorganic and
organic species. The electrostatic environment within the cavity
could be altered by site-directed mutagenesis to induce additional
specific interactions.”
It may also be possible to borrow various existing protein devices
(Table 1.3) and apply them to new uses. The bacteriophage DNA
injection system (Section 9.2.4) is self-assembling and could be
engineered for other applications. Vogel2425,2426 has attached kinesin
motors to flat surfaces in straight grooves; when ATP was added,
the motors were activated, passing 25-nm wide microtubules hand
over hand down the line in the manner of a ciliary array (Section
9.3.4). Montemagno2278,2426 genetically engineered the 12-nm wide
ATPase molecular rotary motor so that one end would adhere to a
metal surface and the other end would provide an attachment site
for 1-micron fluorescent streptavidin-coated bead payloads. When
ATP was added, each bead individually attached to a biomotor in
the motor array began twirling at ~10 Hz, generating a >100 pN
force. Bead rotation was maintained continuously for more than 2
hours, indicating the high reliability of these ~100% efficient
self-assembling biomotors. Montemagno explains that his
laboratory’s “long-term goal is the integration of the F1-ATPase
biological motor with nano-electromechanical systems (NEMS) to
create a new class of hybrid nanomechanical devices.” Other natural
nanomotors such as the self-assembling bacterial flagellar motor578-581
and the hexagonal “packaging RNA” or pRNA pumping mechanism
that packs DNA into the capsid shell of the bacteriophage Phi 291723
are also being intensively studied.
Yet another material which allows moderately well-defined
three-dimensional nanoassemblies is DNA. The ideas behind DNA
nanotechnology have been around since 1980,2414 but activity in this
field accelerated in the 1990s after numerous experimental
difficulties were surmounted. Horn and Urdea2606 reported branched
and forked DNA polymers. Niemeyer1905 and Smith2430 exploited DNA
specificity to generate regular protein arrays, and both2430,2444,2544
suggested using self-assembled DNA as an early material for molecular
nanotechnology. Shi and Bergstrom2416 attached DNA single strands
to rigid organic linkers, showing that cyclical forms of various sizes
could be formed with these molecules. Mirkin’s group1904 attached DNA
molecules to 13-nm colloidal gold particles with ~6 nm particle
spacings, with the goal of assembling nanoparticles into macroscopic
materials; Alivisatos, Schultz and colleagues2415 used DNA to organize
1.4-nm gold nanocrystals in arrays with 2-10 nm spacings. In either
case, the specificity of DNA pairing should allow the construction of
complex geometries since the use of colloidal particles can potentially
add structural elements (which are more rigid than any polymer strand)
to the set of building blocks for nanometer-scale structures—although
to take full advantage of this capability would require particles which
are atomically precise and which possess several chemically distinct
anchoring points on each particle. Damha has synthesized V-shaped
and Y-shaped branched RNA molecules,2566,2567 branching RNA
dendrimers with “forked” and “lariat” shaped RNA intermediates,2568
and even trihelical DNA.2569 Henderson and coworkers2706,2707 have
designed a simple DNA decamer that can form an extended linear
staggered quadruplex array reaching lengths of >1000 nm, and have
made branched oligonucleotides that template the synthesis of their
branched “G-wires”; depending on the ratio of linear to branched
building blocks, extensive DNA arrays with differing connectivities
but irregular interstices can be created.2704
In 1998 the most intensive work on three-dimensional engineered
DNA structures was taking place in Nadrian Seeman’s laboratory in
the New York University Department of Chemistry. Seeman originally
conceived the idea of rigid 3-D DNA structures in the early
1980s,2414,2419 while examining DNA strands that had arranged
themselves into unusual four-armed Holliday junctions.3154 Seeman
recognized that DNA had many advantages as a construction material
for nanomechanical structures.1916 First, each double-strand DNA
with a single-strand overhang has a “sticky end,” so the intermolecular
interaction between two strands with sticky ends is readily
programmed (due to base-pair specificity) and reliably predicted,
and the local structure at the interface is known (sticky ends associate
to form B-DNA). Second, arbitrary sequences are readily manufactured using conventional biotechnological techniques. Third,
DNA can be manipulated and modified by a large variety of enzymes,
including DNA ligase, restriction endonucleases, kinases and exonucleases. Fourth, DNA is a stiff polymer in 1-3 turn lengths2421
and has an external code that can be read by proteins and nucleic
acids.2422
During the 1980s, Seeman worked to develop strands of DNA that
would zip themselves up into more and more complex shapes. Seeman
made junctions with five and six arms, then squares,2417 stick-figure
cubes comprised of 480 nucleotides,1914 and a truncated octahedron
containing 2550 nucleotides and a molecular weight of ~790,000
daltons.1915 The cubes (Fig. 2.3) were synthesized in solution, but
Seeman switched to a solid-support-based methodology2418 in 1992,
greatly improving control by allowing construction of one edge at a
time and isolating the growing objects from one another, allowing
massively parallel construction of objects with far greater control of the
synthesis sequence. By the mid-1990s, most Platonic (tetrahedron, cube,
octahedron, dodecahedron, and icosahedron), Archimedean (e.g.,
truncated Platonics, semiregular prisms and prismoids, cuboctahedron,
etc.), Catalan (linked rings and complex knots), and irregular
polyhedra could be constructed as nanoscale DNA stick figures.
Seeman’s DNA strands that formed the frame figures were strong
enough to serve as girders in a molecular framework, but the junctions
were too floppy. In 1993 Seeman discovered the more rigid antiparallel DNA “double crossover” motif,1920 which in 1996 he used to
design and build a stiff double junction to keep his structures from
sagging.2420The next goal was to bring together a large number of stick
figures to form large arrays or cage-shaped DNA crystals that could
then be used as frameworks for the assembly of other molecules into
pre-established patterns. These DNA molecules would serve as
the scaffolding upon which new materials having precise molecular
structure could be assembled.
In 1998, Erik Winfree and colleagues in Seeman’s laboratory
reported the design and construction of two-dimensional DNA
crystals using self-assembling double crossover molecules.1970
Repeating array units were approximately 2 nm x 4 nm x 16 nm in
size, and examination of the array with an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) revealed domains of up to 500,000 interconnected
units, showing that the self-assembly process (Section 2.3.2) could
be very reliable under ideal conditions. While the work described
the construction of two- and four-unit lattices, the number of
component tiles that could be used in the repeat unit did not
appear to be limited to such small numbers, suggesting that complex
patterns could be assembled into periodic arrays, which might also
serve as templates for nanomechanical assembly. Noted the authors:
“Because oligonucleotide synthesis can readily incorporate modified
bases at arbitrary positions, it should be possible to control the
structure within the periodic group by decoration with chemical
groups, catalysts, enzymes and other proteins, metallic nanoclusters,
46 Nanomedicine • Volume I
conducting silver clusters, DNA enzymes, or other DNA
nanostructures such as polyhedra.” In these experiments, DNA hairpin
turns incorporated within selected units inside their structures were
visible as topographic features under AFM imaging, proving the
ability to build predictable, atomically precise 2-D crystals with
design control over every lattice point. Since the density of lattice
points was much sparser than atomic spacings, this DNA
self-assembly technology could be paired with atomically precise
synthesis of diverse nanoscale subassemblies so that each unique
double crossover unit in a pattern could be decorated with a unique
subassembly of comparable size, possibly allowing the construction
of mechanical nanocomputers1970 and other nanomachinery.
In early 1999, Seeman reported yet another breakthrough—the
construction of a mechanical DNA-based device that is a possible
prototype for a nanoscale robotic arm.2409 The mechanism has two
rigid arms a few nanometers long that can be rotated between fixed
positions by introducing a positively charged cobalt compound into
the solution surrounding the molecules, causing the bridge region
to be converted from the normal B-DNA structure to the unusual
Z-DNA structure. The free ends of the arms shift position by ~2.0
nm during the structural conversion. Explained Seeman: “Using
synthetic DNA as a building material, we have constructed a
controllable molecular mechanical system. In the long-term, the
work will have implications for the development of nanoscale
robots and for molecular manufacturing.”
DNA can also serve as an assembly jig in solution phase. Bruce
Smith and colleagues2423 are devising a method for the assembly
and covalent linkage of proteins into specific orientations and
arrangements as determined by the hybridization of DNA attached
to the proteins, called DNA-Guided Assembly of Proteins (DGAP).
In this method, multiple DNA sequences would be attached to specific
positions on the surface of each protein, and complementary
sequences would bind, forcing protein building blocks (possibly
including biomolecular motors, structural protein fibers, antibodies,
enzymes, or other existing functional proteins) together in specific
desired combinations and configurations, which would then be
stabilized by covalent interprotein linkages. This technique could
also be applied to non-protein components that can be functionalized
at multiple sites with site-specific DNA sequences, although proteins,
at least initially, may be more convenient building blocks due to
their size, their surface chemistry, the wide variety of functions and
mechanical properties they can confer on the resulting assemblies,
and the many existing techniques for introducing designed or
artificially evolved modifications into natural proteins of known
structure. (In 1998, custom DNA and peptide sequences could be
ordered online.)2424 Methods for covalently attaching functional
proteins to a DNA backbone in a specified manner at ~8.5 nm (25
base-pair) intervals,2430 addressable protein targeting in macromolecular assembly,2544 and “protein stitchery”2848 were being
explored by others. Drexler3208 notes that evolution has not maximized the stability of natural proteins, and that substantially greater
stability may be engineered by various means (e.g., increasing folding
stability by >100 Kcal/mole).
2.3.2 Molecular and Supramolecular Chemistry
A second broad category of enabling technology for molecular
manufacturing includes molecular chemistry—the conscious design
of completely artificial, nonbiological chemical structures that could
potentially serve as molecular “parts” or which have specific devicelike
functionality.10,322 For example, catalysts may very loosely “be
thought of as rudimentary assemblers that are slightly programmable
through changes in the reaction milieu (i.e., changes in pH,
temperature, etc.)”.2603 The number of natural molecular “parts” is
immense—perhaps a few hundred thousand bio-organic compounds
have been separated, purified and identified—but by 15 February
1999 chemists had already registered 19,245,458 well-characterized
artificial molecules or other “substances” in the CAS Registry.2863
Synthesis of natural molecules containing ~100 atoms (e.g., a ~1nm3
molecular “part”), using methods of classical organic synthesis often
requiring ~1 synthesis step per atom with ~90% yield per step,2553
was state-of-the-art in 1998.
“What is exciting about modern nanotechnology,” says Nobel
chemist Roald Hoffmann,3174 “is (a) the marriage of chemical
synthetic talent with a direction provided by ‘device-driven’ ingenuity
coming from engineering, and (b) a certain kind of courage provided
by those incentives, to make arrays of atoms and molecules that
ordinary, no, extraordinary chemists just wouldn’t have thought of
trying. Now they’re pushed to do so. And of course they will. They
can do anything.”
Fig. 2.3. Synthetic scheme used to build 3-dimensional DNA cubes in
solution phase (redrawn from Chen and Seeman1914).
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 47
Molecular chemists study how small numbers of atoms combine
covalently with each other to produce molecules with a wide variety
of different properties. Supramolecular chemists are primarily
concerned with the much weaker noncovalent forces that can arise
between molecules—such as hydrogen bonds and van der Waals
interactions—that can be sufficient to bind collections of molecules
tightly enough to form functional nanometer-sized structures.
Supramolecular chemistry765,2445,2446 studies “chemistry beyond the
molecule”765 or “the chemistry of the noncovalent bond”.2523 Its
subject matter includes atomically precise supermolecules
(well-defined discrete oligomolecular species resulting from the
intermolecular association of a few components, such as a receptor
and its substrate) and polymer-like supramolecular assemblies
(polymolecular entities that result from the spontaneous association of
a large undefined number of components).
Self-assembly is a key concept in supramolecular chemistry2433,2455,2456,2491,2527 as it is in nature,2968 allowing the manufacture
of large numbers of compound objects simultaneously and in parallel,
rather than sequentially. Molecular self-assembly is a strategy for
nanofabrication that involves designing molecules and supramolecular entities so that complementarity causes them to aggregate
into desired structures. Self-assembly of atomically precise
supermolecules thus demands well-defined adhesion between
selected molecules, which may require steric (shape and size)
complementarity, interactional complementarity, large contact
areas, multiple interaction sites, and strong overall binding.765
G.M. Whitesides2433 explains that self-assembly has a number
of advantages as a strategy. First, it carries out many of the most
difficult steps in nanofabrication—those involving the smallest
atomic-level modifications of structure—using the very highly
developed techniques of synthetic chemistry. Second, it draws from
the enormous wealth of examples in biology for inspiration;
self-assembly is one of the most important strategies used in biology for
the development of complex, functional structures, such as the
well-studied examples of complex biomachine self-assembly of
whole bacteriophage virions1179,1180,2434,2435 and flagellar rotor
motors216,581,1397 from their smaller molecular “parts”. Third,
self-assembly can incorporate biological structures directly as
components in the final systems. Fourth, self-assembly requires target
structures to be among the most thermodynamically stable available to
the system, thus tends to produce structures that are relatively
defect-free and self-healing. As Lehn765 points out: “By increasing
the size of its entities, nanochemistry works its way upward towards
microlithography and microphysical engineering, which, by further
and further miniaturization, strive to produce ever smaller elements”.
Hierarchical self-assembly of many billions of micron-scale spherical
components into a periodic honeycomb-structured photonic crystal
optical device ~30 microns thick and ~1 cm2 in area was demonstrated
in 1998.2461
There is a wide range of different molecular systems that can
self-assemble, including those which form ordered monomolecular
structures by the coordination of molecules to surfaces,2609 called
self-assembled monolayers (SAMs),2433,2455,2565 self-assembling thin
films2455,2564 and Langmuir-Blodgett films,2608 and self-organizing
nanostructures.123,2563 In these systems, a single layer of molecules
affixed to a surface allows both thickness and composition in the
vertical axis to be adjusted to 0.1-nm by controlling the structure of
the molecules comprising the monolayer, although control of
in-plane dimensions to <100 nm is very difficult. Fluidic
self-assembly of microscale parts1150 and the dynamics of Brownian
self-assembly2889 have also been described, and the theory of
designable self-assembling molecular machine structures is beginning
to be addressed.2956
Another approach using solid-phase peptide synthesis and a
massively convergent self assembly process was employed by M.R.
Ghadiri and colleagues,2436-2440 who designed and synthesized a
number of self-assembling peptide-based nanotubes using cyclic
peptides with an even number of alternating D- and L-amino acids
for the building blocks of the nanotubes. The alternating stereochemistry of the cyclic peptides allowed all the side chains of the
amino acids to be pointing outwards which would not be possible
in an ordinary all L-cyclic peptide. In this conformation, the amide
backbone can H-bond in a direction perpendicular to the plane of
the cyclic peptide. The stacking of two cyclic peptides forms an
H-bonding network resembling an anti-parallel beta-sheet2441 as is
commonly found in natural proteins. The H-bonding lattice quickly
propagates perpendicular to the plane of the cyclic peptide, forming a
tubular microcrystalline structure with 0.75-nm pores, or, in
another experiment, 1.3-nm pores.2442 Another group of nanotubes
was designed with a highly hydrophobic outer surface and a hydrophilic inner pore. These nanotubes were easily inserted into a lipid
bilayer and have been shown to be highly efficient ion channels;1177,2440
nanotubes with slightly larger pores transport small molecules such
as glucose as well.2443 Stable flat nanodisks with diameters
continuously (chemically) adjustable from 30-3000 nm have been
self-assembled in surfactant solutions.2934
Self-assembled crystalline solids such as zeolites2447,2468,2469
incompletely fill space, leaving substantial voids that may be occupied
by solvent molecules or other guest molecules, producing solid-state
host-guest complexes known as clathrates (from the Latin clathratus,
meaning “enclosed by the bars of a grating”). MacNicol and
co-workers2453 reported the first rationally designed clathrate host
in 1978, but the first true de novo design of an organic clathrate
was in 19912454 and involved the formation of an extensive
three-dimensional diamond-like porous lattice built from a single
Tinkertoy-type subunit containing four tetrahedrally arrayed
pyridone groups that acted as connectors to assemble the units
together in a well-defined geometry. However, the crystal was held
together only by weak hydrogen bonds and the links had a
rotational degree of freedom, rendering the exact crystal molecular
arrangement unpredictable.2850 Engineered nanoporous molecular
crystals can provide molecular-scale voids with controlled sizes,
shapes, and embedded chemical environments at resolutions of
0.3-4.0 nm.430,431,695,1522,2447-2449 Other self-assembling crystal
structures have been described2494,2561 including the crystal
engineering of diamondoid networks,2678 template-directed colloidal
crystallization or colloidal epitaxy,2837 organic templating to form
crystalline zeolite-type structures with ordering lengths <3 nm,2892
3-D polymer channels with chemically functionalizable channel
linings,2921 and micromolding combined with templating and
cooperative assembly of block copolymers (Section 3.5.7.1) to
produce hierarchical ordering over discrete and tunable characteristic
length scales of ~10 nm, ~100 nm, and ~1000 nm in a single
body.2893
Dendrimers,2470,2531,2580-2591 also known as arborols or fractal
polymers, are a well-known set of self-assembling structures2610 that
possibly could be used as tools to assist in the assembly of early
nanomachines. Dendrimers are large regularly-branching macromolecules resembling fractal patterns, made by an iterative process
in which small linear molecules are allowed to bind to each other at
a certain number of sites along their length, building up branches
upon branches with each iteration working outward from a core
48 Nanomedicine • Volume I
molecule having at least two chemically reactive arms, somewhat
mimicking tree growth (e.g., Fig. 2.20C). Different core molecules
or building-block chains produce macromolecules with different
shapes, and the outer surface can be terminated with chemical groups
of specific functionality, producing hundreds of differently-surfaced
branched molecules2471 that have already found use in medical
research.2671 Growth is regulated, so size can be accurately
controlled—dendrimers are typically a few nanometers wide but
have been constructed with masses exceeding a million protons (~105
atoms) and with diameters larger than 30 nm. In 1999, convergent
assembly of specified 6-mer dendrimers, via trimerization of precursor
dimer “parts,” was demonstrated.3275
Autocatalysis or self-replication (Section 2.4.2 and Chapter 14)
is yet another approach to the chemical self-assembly of subunits.
In 1989, J. Rebek131,2450-2452 reported the synthesis of supermolecules that could generate copies of themselves when placed in
a sea of simpler molecular parts, with each component part consisting
of up to a few dozen atoms. Molecular self-replication has continued to
be studied by others.2524-2526,2602 Ghadiri2457 reported a
self-replicating peptide in 1996, and by 1998 his laboratory had
moved on to studies of more complex autocatalytic cycle
networks.2458-2460 It is unknown how complex such assembly cycles
may be made, but Ghadiri was investigating a self-replicating
256-component molecular ecosystem incorporating ~32,000
possible binary interactions,2601 in 1998.
By 1998, chemists had already synthesized a vast variety of simple
molecular parts of which only a tiny sampling can be mentioned
here. For instance, carbon rings have been linked edge-on or by
corners to create propeller-shaped molecules called propellanes2497
(Fig. 2.4) or rotanes (Fig. 2.5), or stacked with short hydrocarbon
links to make gear-looking molecules such as cyclophane2493 and
superphane (Fig. 2.6). Hydrocarbon molecular polyhedra in the
shape of triangular (e.g., triangulane2571), cubic (e.g., cubane, first
made by P. Eaton in 19642570), pentagonal and hexagonal prisms,
collectively known as prismanes, have been created (Fig. 2.7), along
with more unusual geometrical forms such as paddlane, housane,
basketane, churchane, pagodane, and bivalvane382 (Fig. 2.8; one
carbon atom at each vertex). Cryptands,2479 spherands,2492
cryptaspherands and carcerands,410 corannulene baskets,2639 and
calixarenes411 are bowl-shaped molecules whose benzene ring walls
hold their cavities rigid. The bowl rim of a calixarene (Fig. 2.9) can
be lined with chemical groups to determine which guests it will
accept, or two bowls can be bonded together,2547 making a hollow
nanoscale reaction vessel, and various molecular cages and capsules
with precise sizes and characteristics have been assembled.1262,2549-2551
A variety of nonchiral and chiral square molecules have been
synthesized,2473,2543 as well as molecular “bottlebrushes”;2475
DNA-polymer constant-force springs;2476,2477 the ferric wheel (Fig.
2.10);2552 molecular barrels2558 and molecular tennis balls;2551
various helical,2554-2556,2569,2605,2638 boxlike,2559 and other hollow
organic2572 structures; molecular “turnstiles”2573 and “molecular
tweezers”;2677 simple and complex trefoil knot molecules;2562 and
stable carbyne* molecular rods with chains lengths up to ~300 carbon
atoms having alternating single and triple covalent bonds.317 Chemists
are justifiably awed by the creation of structures like the ferric wheel;
“for me,” observed Nobel chemist Roald Hoffmann,125 “this molecule
provides a spiritual high....The molecule is beautiful because its
symmetry reaches directly into the soul, [playing] a note on a
Platonic ideal.”
Molecular gear systems first became a popular object of chemical
study during the 1980s. For example, G. Yamamoto164 described
“compounds that exist in conformations which are regarded as static
meshed gears with two-toothed and three-toothed wheels and some
of them behave as dynamic gears.” H. Iwamura163 prepared one
system that formed a chain of beveled molecular gears with ~GHz
rotation rates, and another “doubly connected bevel gear
system...[Transfer] of information from one end of the molecular
system to the other end could take place in large molecules via
cooperativity of the torsional motions of the chain.” Kurt Mislow2472
*In chemical nomenclature, hydrocarbons with single carbon-carbon bonds are “-anes,” double bonds make “-enes,” and triple bonds make “-ynes.”
Fig. 2.4. Propellanes (H atoms not shown).382
Fig. 2.5. Rotanes (H atoms not shown).382
Fig. 2.6. (A) Cyclophane;(B) Superphane (H atoms not shown).382
A B
Fig. 2.7. The prismanes.382
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 49
gave numerous examples of molecular gear systems that he had
synthesized using the methods of traditional solution chemistry,
which “resemble to an astonishing degree the coupled rotations of
macroscopic mechanical gears.” He added: “It is possible to imagine a
role for these and similar mechanical devices, molecules with tiny
gears, motors, levers, etc., in the nanotechnology of the future.”
In 1998, Gimzewski and coworkers2474 synthesized and observed
a 1.5-nm diameter gearlike single molecule (hexa-tert-butyl
decacyclene) rotating within a supramolecular bearing (a void in a
2-D lattice) at room temperature on the surface of a Cu{100} lattice.
The authors suggest that added non-thermal noise (e.g., temperature
differences produced by tunnel current heating of the rotor) could
be rectified by asymmetries in the rotor/neighbor potential energy
curve, allowing the rotor to turn unidirectionally. Says Gimzewski:
“Our wheel is frictionless in the conventional sense of the word,
and it doesn’t wear out.” Gimzewski’s experimental work confirms
Drexler’s calculations10 that van der Waals bearings can operate in
molecular systems, that multi-atomic bearing surfaces with higher
load capacities than sigma bond bearings can be built, that these
bearings can run with no lubricants, and that such bearings have
sufficiently low energy barriers to allow turning by thermal vibrations
alone.
By 1998, limited control of the mechanical action of molecular
parts had been demonstrated. For example, in 1994 T. Ross Kelly’s
group created a “paddlewheel” molecule (a spinning propeller-shaped
wheel) with a built-in chemically-controlled brake. In solution, the
wheel spins freely, but when Hg++ ions are added, a blocking ligand
physically rotates into a new position (tripping the brake) and stopping
the rotation; removal of the mercury causes the wheel to resume
spinning.17 In 1997, Kelly’s group used similar techniques to
synthesize the first molecular ratchet,2546 a propeller with three
benzene-ring “blades” that serve as gear teeth. A row of four rings
(the pawl) sits between two of the blades, such that the propeller
cannot turn without pushing it aside; because of a twist in the pawl,
it is easier to turn clockwise than counterclockwise under thermal
agitation, providing mechanical rectification without net motion
or energy extraction.2611 Shinkai and colleagues382,2478 fabricated a
pair of molecular tongs for grasping metal ions that uses two crown
ether rings as the jaws, linked by two benzene rings joined through
two double-bonded nitrogen atoms (Fig. 2.11). Irradiation with
ultraviolet light induces photoisomerization of the double bond
between the nitrogen atoms, closing the jaws; heat reverses the process,
opening the jaws. In related systems, collectively called “butterfly
molecules,” irradiation with visible light or pH changes can also
induce opening. Seeman’s chemically-operated mechanical DNA
system2409 provides similar control of molecular mechanical movement
(Section 2.3.1). Numerous controllable molecular electronics devices
and possible nanocomputer components are reviewed in Section 10.2.
Noncovalent self-assembly of molecular parts has also been
demonstrated. For example, Fraser Stoddart and colleagues1805,2482-2484
have extensively investigated the rotaxanes,2481 molecules in which
one part is threaded through a hole or loop in another, and kept
from unthreading by end-groups, like a ring trapped on a barbell.
In one system (Fig. 10.8), a ring-shaped molecule slides freely along
a shaft-like chain molecule, moving back and forth between
Fig. 2.8. Other unusual molecular “parts”.382
Fig. 2.9. Calixarene.382
Fig. 2.10. Ferric wheel (Fe, O, C atoms shown; H, Cl atoms not
shown).2552
Fig. 2.11. “Butterfly Molecule” used as molecular tongs.382
50 Nanomedicine • Volume I
stations at either end with a frequency of ~500 Hz, making an
oscillating “molecular shuttle”.2483 This shuttling behavior can be
controlled by a series of different chemical, electrochemical, or
photochemical external stimuli.2484,3541 Using a different approach,
G. Wenz2487 threaded ~120 molecular beads onto a single, long,
poly-iminooligomethylene polymer chain, making a “molecular
necklace.” Other groups are pursuing related research2522,2529,2530
regarding [n]-rotaxanes2538,2539 and pseudorotaxanes (mechanicallythreaded molecules),2541,2542 while still others are using the necklace
technique as a means, for example, of self-assembling ~2 nm wide
cyclodextrin nanotubes.2488
Another interesting molecular system that can be made entirely
by self-assembly is the catenanes,2481 which have two or more closed
rings joined like the links of a chain. The rings are mechanically
linked—there are no covalent bonds between separate links. The
first [2]-catenane (2 linked rings) was constructed by Edel Wasserman
of AT&T Bell Laboratories in 1960, using simple hydrocarbon rings;
the first [3]-catenane was synthesized in 1977. In 1994, Fraser
Stoddart and David Amabilino constructed the first [5]-catenane,2485
having ~372 atoms, dubbed “olympiadane” because of its resemblance
to the Olympic rings, and in 1997 the same group announced the
first deterministically-ordered 7-ring heptacatenane;2535 another
group later reported the spontaneous self-assembly of a 10-component
catenane.3285 By 1998, much research on larger polymeric chains of
linked rings (e.g., oligocatenanes2532), supramolecular “daisy
chains”,2533,2534 fullerene-containing catenanes,2536 and supramolecular weaving2537 was in progress. The smallest [2]-catenane
constructed to date has dimensions 0.4 nm x 0.6 nm.2528
Self-assembled mechanically-interlocked 2-dimensional2595-2597 and
3-dimensional2598,2599 “infinite” arrays of single molecular ringlike
species are known. Interestingly, in 1998 it was discovered that many
viral coats (which also self-assemble) appear to be a 2-dimensional
“chain-mail” weave of mechanically-interlocked protein rings—for
instance, the spherical bacteriophage HK97 capsid shell consists of
exactly 72 interlinked protein rings, specifically 60 hexamers and
12 pentamers.2486
Complex molecular parts also can be built up from simpler
molecular parts by covalent bonding as low-symmetry shape-invariant
molecular object polymers,2692 or via processes variously known as
modular chemistry,2498,2499 heterosupramolecular chemistry,3220
chemical assembly,3541 or structure-directed synthesis2489,2490—
including the well-known Diels-Alder reactions2557 (e.g., see Fig. 2.20F)
which may be employed repetitively to fabricate a series of
atomically-precise molecular rods, rings, and nanocages (e.g.,
“beltenes” and “collarenes”2489) composed of polyacenequinone units
with nanometer-scale dimensions. Such efforts have been described
as steps toward “molecular LEGO”,2489 “molecular Meccano”,2480
“molecular Tinkertoys”,2509-2516,2842 or “molecular building blocks”.2850
Some structure-directed assembly has been achieved with simple DNA
forms.1916 Other simple techniques for synthesizing nanowires,643
nanorods,2672,2710 nanotubes,1411,2673,2674,2862 and nanocages,2640,2675,2862
or for selecting polymers for length,2686 are well-known.
For instance, Jean-Marie Lehn2679 has created rectangular grid
complexes by mixing rodlike ligands that make use of different
numbers of binding sites—one example is a 4 x 5 array consisting
of nine ligands and 20 metal ions, nanoscale grids which he claims
might one day find use “as components within a futuristic information
storage and processing nanotechnology”. C.M. Drain2680,2681 has
described a 21-component (5 nm)2 square array of nine porphyrins
tethered together by 12 palladium ions shaped like a four-pane window.
The structure is built from three different kinds of porphyrins—(1)
an X-shaped unit that coordinates to four metal ions, forming the
center of the array, (2) a T-shaped unit that coordinates to three
metals and forms each side of the array, and (3) an L-shaped unit
that coordinates to only two metals and forms each corner of the
array. When these components are placed in solution in the correct
ratio, they form the square array within a half hour at room temperature with about 90% yield. The same porphyrin units can be
combined in different ratios and induced to form wires or tapes.
The properties of such arrays can be fine-tuned by choosing the
appropriate metal ion linker and functionalized porphyrin unit.2679
Jeffrey Moore has investigated a three-dimensional
nanoscaffolding comprised of a molecular lattice that could serve as
a framework for catalysts, photosynthetic molecules, or more complex
molecular devices. Moore’s original objective was to synthesize
modular building blocks with physical and chemical properties that
would dictate a “programmed assembly” protocol for
“nanoarchitectures”.2574-2579The characteristics of each modular unit
shaped the weak intermolecular attractions—electrostatic, van der
Waals, and hydrogen-bonding forces—between it and its neighbors
so that units would array themselves in a larger structure with the
desired spacing and geometry. Moore’s group first linked
phenylacetylene subunits into oligomers of various lengths which
bend and twist like wire sculptures until their ends meet to form
closed polyhedral molecules—the basic scaffold components (of
which there were at least half a dozen shapes). These building blocks
then self-assembled or folded2555 into geometries at least partly
controlled by designed hydrogen-bonding interactions. The molecular
polyhedra each possessed several phenylene groups, “chemical
handles” upon which other molecular groups could be hung. Moore
then focused on ~10-nm dendrimeric forms2580-2585 and later began
attaching photosensitive antenna molecules to these structures.2586-2591
By 1997, Moore had begun investigating norbornadiene on Si{100}
in an effort to develop ways to covalently attach molecules onto
surfaces with sub-nanometer spatial precision,2592,2593 and
had suggested a packing model for interpenetrated diamondoid
structures.2594 Robson’s group2846 has also investigated possible
scaffolding molecules.
Josef Michl is attempting to build a molecular construction kit
using molecular rods and connectors, pursuing an explicit vision of
“molecular Tinkertoys”2509-2516 by working with simple molecular
structures that form stiff, flexible rods. Michl has assembled rods
from a mixture of carbon-boron molecules (e.g., 10-vertex or 12-vertex
carboranes2495) and carbon-hydrogen molecules, providing fine
control over the total rod length. The rods are built up from more
primitive molecular parts, such as propellane (a strained form of
C5H6) and cubane (a strained form of C8H8), to make
“staffanes”2500-2510 which are a series of cage units in a linear series
(Fig. 2.12). (Strained molecules are constructed with bonds that are
forced out of their normal angles, as for example 90˚ in the case of
cubane, compared with carbon’s normal orientation of 109.5˚.)
Michl has fabricated rods whose lengths vary from 0.5 nm to 2.5
nm, in precise 0.1-nm steps. There are other ways of making rodlike molecules, but Michl’s are highly inert, do not absorb visible or
UV light, are stable up to at least 200˚C, and do not react with the
oxygen in air even at high temperatures.2496
Related work is underway in Michl’s laboratory on connectors
to join the rods together.2496 Metal atoms would be the simplest
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 51
solution, offering the useful quality of strong joints that can be easily
disassembled. Different metals give different binding geometries—
square, octahedral, and so on. Many of the connectors are
metal-containing species; some are symmetrically trisubstituted or
hexasubstituted benzenes or tetrasubstituted cyclobutadiene
complexes. Michl must build the right chemical groups onto the
rod termini to make them adhere to the connectors as desired. In
one example,2496 tiny crosses were built by attaching carboxylate
groups to one end of the staffanes, allowing them to bind to a
connector made of two rhodium atoms. The groups at the other
end of the rods were converted to an ester group, which doesn’t
bind to rhodium, and so the crosses self-assembled correctly. Michl
has also fabricated “star connectors” in which the rods are built into
the molecules as covalently bonded arms of a star. For instance, one
3-arm star connector uses three large carboranes coupled to a central
benzene ring, allowing a pedestal to be attached vertically to the
benzene ring via a ruthenium “sandwich” bond.2496 Additional
devices could be installed on this molecular scaffolding, such as
optically active molecules or even molecular mechanical “windmills”.2516
Nanoscale square2517-2519 and hexagonal2520,2521 planar grids have
been fabricated. Extensive ab initio quantum mechanical calculations
accompany the experimental work and aid in the interpretation of the
results. Michl’s ultimate goal is “the production of thin layers of
solids of completely controlled aperiodic structure consisting of an
inert covalent scaffolding carrying selected active groups.”
G. Leach and colleagues2705 used computers to simulate various
diamond and graphite nanostruts using molecular dynamics
calculations, analyzing solid rectangular struts with varying aspect
ratios, cross-sections, terminating atoms (for diamond), potential
energy functions, and temperatures. The most dramatic differences
were seen between struts with 100:1 aspect ratios and struts with
lower (10:1 or 1:1) aspect ratios—the diamond strut with a 100:1
aspect ratio and a unit cell (~0.4 nm)2
) cross-section begins to curl
(with end-to-end distance decreasing 1.2 nm after 20 picosec) due
to thermal vibration (both at 150 K and 300 K), while a unit strut
with an aspect ratio of 10:1 or a 100:1 strut with a (1 nm)2
cross-section showed end-to-end length fluctuations of only ~0.1
nm. The authors concluded that support struts with a cross section
of at least (1 nm)2 would be sufficient to keep both end-to-end
distance and transverse fluctuations below ~0.1 nm in struts with
10:1 aspect ratios. Other work by the same group2664 claims that
many nanomachine designs may actually perform better than
molecular dynamics results might suggest, or may require fewer atoms
for the same positional stability.2705The elastic and wear characteristics
of diamond are being studied computationally by others.2764,2900,2901
No discussion of molecular “parts” could be complete without
mention of the fullerenes,* first discovered in 19852612,2613 and
vigorously investigated ever since.522,523,1308,1821,2619,2636,2637,2702
Fullerenes are one of the three known allotropic forms of carbon. In
graphite, the most common allotrope, carbon atoms are arranged
in hexagonal rings and strongly bonded into parallel planar sheets,
with much weaker bonding between the sheets, giving graphite its
excellent lubricating properties. In diamond, the second allotropic
form, carbon atoms are arranged in a symmetric, tetrahedral structure,
giving immense strength. Exposed to air, both diamond surfaces
and graphite edges are quickly coated or “passivated” with hydrogen or
other atoms that tie up the dangling bonds. In fullerenes, the third
allotropic form, carbon atoms form large and hollow cage-like structures,
often roughly spherical or tubular, made up of closed curved
one-atom-thick sheets of carbon atoms arranged in a number of
five-, six-, and higher-membered rings. Interestingly, the fullerenes
need no passivating hydrogens or other atoms to satisfy their chemical
bonding requirements at the surface—in this sense, “fullerenes are
the first and only stable forms of pure, finite carbon”.522
A new journal, Fullerene Science and Technology, appeared in 1993,
and by the mid-1990s ~3000 papers on fullerenes and their properties
had been published and 149 fullerene-related patents had been
issued in the U.S. alone (through 1996). By 1998, an incredible
variety of fullerenes of many shapes and sizes had been synthesized.
The original fullerene, C60, consists of exactly 60 carbon atoms
arranged in a soccer-ball structure (Fig. 2.13; lone carbon atom at
each vertex) with 20 hexagons and 12 pentagons (with each pentagon
entirely surrounded by hexagons). In theory, small molecules such
as H2 or CO, and probably CH4, would fit inside C60.
2628 A slightly
larger variant, C70, is the same except that an extra belt of carbon
atoms has been inserted around the equator. Smaller (Fig. 2.14) and
*The first fullerene to be discovered, the spherical C60 molecule, was originally named “buckminsterfullerene” by its discoverers, due to the molecule’s similarity to the geodesic
domes designed by the famous American architect and engineer, Buckminster Fuller (1895-1983). The name has since been shortened by common usage to “fullerenes,”
although spherical or tubular fullerenes are sometimes informally called “buckyballs” and “buckytubes,” again reflecting the original provenance.
Fig. 2.12. “Staffane” rigid rods of different lengths for a molecular kit (H
atoms not shown; redrawn from Pease2496).
Fig. 2.13. C60 fullerene “buckyball” and a soccer ball.382
Fig. 2.14. C32 and C50 fullerenes.382
52 Nanomedicine • Volume I
larger (Fig. 2.15) variants have been observed; as cages get bigger,
the corners (where the 12 pentagons needed for closure reside) get
sharper. The topologically smallest possible fullerene is a dodecahedron
consisting of 12 pentagons and 20 carbon atoms, but the ring isomer
of C20 (a hoop of single carbons) is apparently energetically favored
over the bowl or spherical (fullerene) isomers; in 1998, C28 was the
smallest fullerene that had been observed experimentally,2614 and
C36 could be made in significant quantities by arc-discharge.2910
The approximate diameter (measured to atomic centers) of a
spheroidal fullerene of formula Cn is Dball ~ 1.1 (n/60)1/2 nanometers.2615
In 1998, purified C60 cost $27.50/gm (99.5% pure) or $60/gm
(99.9%), C70 $250/gm (98%), and C84 $3,750/gm (90%) from
Dynamic Enterprises Ltd. of London.
Insertion of many additional equatorial belts of carbon atoms
(incorporated as hexagons) into a spheroidal fullerene results in a
long cylinder with graphite-like (“graphene”) walls and spherical
endcaps, making a class of fullerenes known as the capsular fullerenes
or single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNT) that come in many sizes
and chiral forms (Fig. 2.16).2626,2651,2652,2857 The molecular form
of carbon nanotubes has been likened to rolled chicken wire. SWNTs
may be synthesized by vaporizing graphite spiked with 1% catalyst
from the nickel, cobalt and iron group above 3000˚C, then allowing
the vapor to slowly condense. Tubes form because the metal atoms
interact with dangling bonds at the end of a tube, favoring tube
extension over hemispherical capping by newly arriving carbon vapor
atoms. (For any given mass number, ball-shaped fullerenes are energetically favored over tube-shaped fullerenes during
high-temperature synthesis in the absence of catalyst.2615) SWNTs
typically self-assemble in 1.1 nm wide tubes, although smaller
single-walled nanotubes and larger single-walled and multi-walled
nested nanotubes2626 exist. SWNT carbon atoms are bonded in
virtually flawless hexagonal arrays. Simulations show that isolated
flaws migrate to the ends of the tube and are eliminated, a phenomenon known as “self-healing”.1746 Single-molecule nanotubes of
C1,000,000 or larger, with lengths >100,000 times longer than their
widths (e.g., ~1 mm long), had been synthesized by 1998. While
graphite is a very brittle material, the graphene walls of a carbon
nanotube are quite resilient. Computer simulations and experiments
confirm that nanotubes kink when bent (Fig. 2.17), then snap back
when released.2661 Nanotube diameter is Dtube = 0.078 (n2
 + nm +
m2
)
1/2 nanometers, where (n, m) is the “rollup vector” defined by the
number of steps required for a repeat pattern along two crystallographic cylinder wall axes. The cohesive energy per atom required
to curve a flat graphene sheet into a cylinder1308 is Erollup = (13 zJ-nm2
/ Dtube2
). (1 zeptojoule (zJ) = 10-21 joules.) As an example, a (10,10)
nanotube has Dtube = 1.36 nm and Erollup = 7 zJ/atom. Young’s
modulus for individual SWNTs, assuming a hollow (open-ring)
cross-section, has been estimated as high as ~5.5 x 1012 N/m2
;
2659
elastic bending modulus (measured as 1 x 1012 to 0.1 x 1012 N/m2
)
decreases sharply with increasing diameter (from 8-40 nm).3023 In 1998,
purified carbon single-walled nanotubes were available via the Internet
for $1400/gm from Tubes@Rice, or for $200/gm at lesser purity
from CarboLex.
From spatial geometry, it is known that hexagonal tiling produces
flat sections (like cylinder walls), and inserting pentagons into an
hexagonal array produces positive curvature (like spheres), making
endcaps. But 7-sided heptagons can also be inserted into hexagonal
arrays to induce negative curvature,1308,2651 thus permitting concave
surface deformations such as saddle-shaped fullerenes1308 (Fig. 2.18)
or possibly helical tubular structures.2635 Indeed, note Colbert and
Smalley, “the use of hexagonal, pentagonal, and heptagonal substructures are sufficient to produce caged carbon structures of any
topology”.2643 Nature makes use of this same geometrical principle
in the radiolarians,520 tiny protozoans with fullerene-like siliceous
skeletons, and in the conical nucleoprotein core particle of the HIV-1
Fig. 2.16. Single-walled carbon nanotubes.1308
Fig. 2.15. C240 and C540 fullerenes.382 Fig. 2.17. Carbon nanotubes kink when bent.2661
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 53
virus2684 (Fig. 2.19).* R. Smalley observes that a graphene sheet has
the highest tensile strength of any known 2-dimensional network,
and the packing density of atoms in the sheet (e.g., atoms/m2
) is
higher than any other network made of any atoms in the periodic
table and higher than the packing density in any 2-dimensional slice
through any 3-dimensional object—even diamond which has the
highest known 3-D packing density. Hence the graphene sheet is
effectively impermeable under normal chemical conditions.
Carbon nanotubes have also been observed with a variety of
end-cap shapes2650 and with tubes that reduced2651 or increased2658
their diameter for some distance before terminating. Toroidal
fullerenes can be produced experimentally;2632,2657,3206
cone-like,2652,2653,2684,2688 spindle-like,2654 and helical2655-2657 fullerene
objects have also been examined. By 1998, the mechanical properties
of fullerenes and carbon nanotubes were being extensively investigated2277,2629,2659-2661,2715-2719,2903-2905 and there were experimental
demonstrations of:
1. a limited ability to cut fullerene nanotubes to specific desired
lengths;1525,2685,2855
2. dissolving derivatized SWNTs in common organic solvents;2164
3. the synthesis of self-oriented nanotube arrays;2691 and
4. the trapping of individual C60 molecules in a perforated
Langmuir-Blodgett film “workpiece holder”2630 (though an even
simpler means for producing 2-nm hole arrays with 7-8 nm
hole spacings was later reported2631).
Nanotubes were also being investigated as nanoscale sensor components.2908,2909,3023
Given an ability to synthesize a wide variety of fullerene shapes
and sizes, the next task is to find ways to join them together in
specific desired molecular architectures. Two hydrogens were readily
added to fullerene carbon atoms, making specific isomers of C60H2
and C70H2,
2616,2617 and in the 1990s fullerene chemistry began to
be explored.2618,2619,2649,2906 A little more than a decade after the
discovery of C60, gram quantities of buckyballs became widely
available2627 for chemical experimentation. Progress in covalent
fullerene chemistry exploded.2624 By the late 1990s, fullerene surfaces
could be regioselectively functionalized in many interesting ways,
including (Fig. 2.20):
A. a fullerene dimer,2625
B. a fullerene-polyester polymer,2621
C. a fullerene dendrimer,2620
D. a fullerene-rotaxane2622 and catenane,2536
E. a fullerene-nucleotide DNA cleaving agent,2623
F. a Diels-Alder fullerene adduct that is very stable against
cycloreversion,2624 and
G. 3-dimensional extended polymeric multifullerene forms such as
acetylenic macro-rings2624 and DNA/fullerene hybrid materials.3024
*Interestingly, conical hexagonal lattices with narrow endcaps that are closed using P pentagons are required by Euler’s theorem to have a quantized cone angle θ defined
by sin(θ/2) = 1 - (P/6) for P = 0, 1, ... , 6; minimum cone angle is 19.2˚ at P = 5.2684
Fig. 2.19. Biological “fullerenes”.
Fig. 2.18. One possible saddle-shaped fullerene.1308
Fig. 2.20A. Fullerene dimer.2625
Calciferous Radiolarian Microskeletons520 Nucleoprotein
HIV Viral Core
Particle2684
54 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Fig. 2.20B. Fullerene polyester polymer.2621
Fig. 2.20C. Fullerene dendrimer.2620
Fig. 2.20D. Fullerene rotaxane.2622
Fig. 2.20E. Fullerene-nucleotide DNA cleaving agent.2623
Fig. 2.20F. Stable Diels-Alder fullerene adduct.2624
Fig. 2.20G. Extended fullerene polymers.2624
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 55
Theory2665 and experiment2666 suggest that SWNTs may be joined
at 30˚ angles to create complex structures, including helices and
three-way nanotube junctions1308,2614 as suggested by Figure 2.18.
In 1998, the idea of using fullerenes as “Tinkertoys” for molecular
construction was just starting to be considered.2643 For example,
given the synthesis of C60 exohedral monoadducts and multiple
adducts described above, it may be possible to fabricate simple gears
by bonding rigid ligands onto the external surfaces of carbon
nanotubes in the manner of gear teeth,2644-2646 although the chemical
synthesis of nanotubes with precisely positioned teeth will not be
easy.2667 Given the success in 1996 of IBM scientists2647 in positioning
individual organic molecules (each having a total of 173 atoms and
a 1.5-nm diameter) at room temperature by purely mechanical
means, it might also be possible to align and maintain these molecular
gear teeth in atomically precise meshed positions. If this could be
done, would such devices actually work in the manner of macroscale
gears?
J. Han and colleagues at NASA/Ames2648 performed a detailed
2000-atom molecular dynamics simulation to investigate the
properties of molecular gears fashioned from carbon nanotubes with
teeth added via a benzyne reaction known to occur with C60.
Computationally, one gear is powered by forcing the atoms near
the end of the nanotube to rotate (Fig. 2.21), and a second gear is
allowed to rotate by keeping the atoms near the end of its nanotube
constrained to a cylinder (i.e., the ends of the shaft were constrained
to not elongate but were allowed to move within a plane transverse
to the tube symmetry axis). The meshing aromatic gear teeth transfer
angular momentum from the powered gear to the driven gear. Each
gear is made of a 1.1-nm diameter (14, 0) nanotube with seven
benzyne teeth. The spacing between two nanotubes is 1.8 nm and
the smallest distance between a tooth atom and a tube atom is ~0.4
nm. The results show that the gears can operate up to 70 GHz in
vacuo at room temperature without overheating or slipping. As
rotational speed rises above 150 GHz, the gears overheat and begin
to slip with tooth tilting up to 20˚, but no bond or tooth breaking
occurs up to at least 3000 K and slipping gears can always be
returned to proper operation by lowering the temperature or the
rotation rate. A related nanotube gear system (5-8 sprockets, 290-464
atoms) simulated by Robertson and colleagues2670 at the Naval
Research Laboratory (NRL) showed similar overheating at 500 GHz
but was stable when accelerated to only 20 GHz.
The NASA group also simulated several other types of
nanotube-based gear systems. For instance, a rack and pinion system
(Fig. 2.22) was designed using a gear made from a (14, 0) nanotube
with teeth separated by two hexagon rings and a shaft made from a
(9, 9) tube with teeth separated by three rings. Gear and shaft are
1.94 nm apart, with tooth face normal to the radial direction of
nanotube (14, 0) for the gear, but in the axis direction of nanotube
(9, 9) for the shaft. The gear could receive power, driving the shaft,
or vice versa, and worked well for shaft translational velocities up to
~100 m/sec. (Most devices described in Drexler10 typically move at
≤1 m/sec.) Since shaft mass is almost twice gear mass, it takes more
power for the gear to drive the shaft. In another simulation involving a
large 1.4-nm gear coupled to a smaller 0.8-nm gear
(Fig. 2.23), the large gear drives the smaller gear smoothly, but if
power is instead applied to the smaller gear at a sufficiently large
acceleration, then the smaller gear does not drive the larger one but
instead “bounces back and forth several times, like elastic collisions
of a small ball between two boards.”
Another research group at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL) used classical molecular dynamics to investigate the
properties of molecular bearings consisting of an inner and an outer
carbon nanotube.2662,2663The graphite bearings ranged in size from
inner shafts between 0.4-1.6 nm in diameter up to 12 nm long, and
outer cylinders between 1.0-2.3 nm in diameter up to 4 nm long.
The original simulations2662 found excessive vibrational motion, but
subsequent work using a more complete quantum approach2663,2664
found that under certain conditions the nanobearing is “frictionless”
and undergoes superrotation, a classical dynamical behavior
reminiscent of superfluidity. The regime of superrotary motion is
somewhat restricted when the nanobearing is under load, which
suggests that a very careful design is required to ensure optimum
performance.
The ORNL group simulated a fullerene motor2668 consisting of
two concentric graphite cylinders (shaft and sleeve) with one positive
and one negative electric charge attached to the shaft. Rotational
motion of the shaft was induced by applying one, or sometimes
two, oscillating laser fields. The shaft cycled between periods of
Fig. 2.21. Computer simulation of fullerene nanogears of the same size
(courtesy of Al Globus, NASA/Ames).2648,2667
Fig. 2.22. Computer simulation of fullerene rack and pinion system
(courtesy of Al Globus, NASA/Ames).2648,2667
56 Nanomedicine • Volume I
undesirable rotational pendulum-like behavior and good unidirectional
motor-like behavior. The NASA/Ames group simulated a
pulsed-laser-powered carbon nanotube gear-motor system which
rotated consistently in one direction, although that direction could
be either clockwise or counterclockwise.2667
G. Leach and colleagues2705 also simulated various carbon
nanotubes treated as nanostruts using molecular dynamics calculations,
as described earlier for diamondoid block struts. The conclusions
were similar though less severe. Nanotubes with 100:1 aspect ratio
and 0.8-nm diameter at 300 K experienced periodic oscillations in
length of ~0.4 nm at ~122 GHz, although multiple modes clearly
were being excited; nanotubes of lesser aspect varied by at most
~0.04 nm.
2.3.3 Scanning Probe Technology
The third general pathway leading to molecular manufacturing
involves a technology known as scanning probe microscopes
(SPMs).1093,2728-2730 The first of the SPMs was the Scanning Tunneling
Microscope (STM) developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s by
Gerd Karl Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer at an IBM research lab in
Zurich, Switzerland,2731-2735 earning these scientists, along with
Ernst Ruska, the 1986 Nobel in Physics. The STM was initially
used as an imaging device, capable of resolving individual atoms by
recording the quantum tunneling current that occurs when an
extremely sharp conductive probe tip (usually tungsten, nickel, gold,
or PtIr) is brought to within about one atomic diameter of an atom,
and then adjusting the position of the tip to maintain a constant
current as the tip is scanned over a bumpy atomic surface (Fig. 2.24).
A height change as small as 0.1 nm can cause tunneling current to
double. The tip is connected to an arm that is moved in three
dimensions by stiff ceramic piezoelectric transducers that provide
sub-nanometer positional control. If the tip is atomically sharp, then
the tunneling current is effectively confined to a region within ~0.1
nm of the point on the surface directly beneath the tip, thus the
record of tip adjustments generates an atomic-scale topographic map
of the surface. STM tips can scan samples at ~KHz frequencies,
although slower scans are used for very rough surfaces. In some
modern STMs (e.g., the DI Nanoscope), the sample is moved while
the tip is held stationary.
A major limitation of the STM was that it only worked with
conducting materials such as metals or semiconductors, but not with
insulators or biological structures such as DNA.1066,2775 To remedy
this situation, in 1986 Binnig, Quate and Gerber developed the
Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)445 which is sensitive directly to
the forces between the tip and the sample, rather than a tunneling
current. An AFM can operate in at least three modes. In “attractive”
or non-contact mode (NC-AFM, 0.01-1 N/m force constant), the
tip is held some tens of nanometers above the sample surface where
it experiences the attractive combination of van der Waals, electrostatic,
or magnetostatic forces. In “repulsive” or contact mode (C-AFM,
0.01-1 N/m force constant), the tip is pressed close enough to the
surface for tip and sample electron clouds to overlap, generating a
repulsive electrostatic force of ~10 nN, much like the stylus riding a
groove in a record player. There is also intermittent-contact mode
(IC-AFM, 0.01-1 N/m force constant), which is sometimes called
“tapping” mode. In any of these modes, a topographic map of the
surface is generated by recording the up-and-down motions of the
cantilever arm as the tip is scanned. These motions may be measured
either by the deflection of a light spot reflected from a mirrored
surface on the cantilever or by tiny changes in voltage generated by
piezoelectric transducers attached to the moving cantilever arm.
Fig. 2.23. Computer simulation of fullerene nanogears of different sizes
(courtesy of Al Globus, NASA/Ames).2648,2667
Fig. 2.24. Schematic of scanning tunneling microscope (STM)
(redrawn from Drexler72 and Foster2788).
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 57
Typical AFM cantilevers have lengths of 100-400 microns, widths
of 20-50 microns, and thicknesses between 0.4 to several microns.
AFM tips may be positioned with ~0.01 nm precision, compressive
loads as small as 1-10 pN are routinely measured,433,450,2757,2758 and
the tips may be operated even in liquids.2898
S. Vetter notes that STM technology has also improved, reaching
resolutions of ~0.001 nm in the z direction (vertical) and ~0.01 nm
in the xy plane, well beyond atomic resolution. The STM remains
the instrument with the best resolution. The conducting-surface
limitation has been overcome in some cases by coating the target
with an extremely thin conducting layer, developing tips with multiple
electrodes, and coating a conducting substrate with a sample so thin
as to allow enough conduction even if the sample is characterized as
an insulator in bulk.
By 1998, the growing family of SPMs included at least forty
types of instruments and techniques that relied on interactions
between a scanned surface and a nearby probe. Different instruments
measured different forces and thus could be used to characterize
different properties of the surface.2758 For example, friction force
microscopes (FFMs), magnetic force microscopes (MFMs), shear
force microscopes (ShFMs), scanning capacitance microscopes
(SCMs), scanning conducting ion microscopes, chemical force
microscopes,2755,2756 and electrostatic force microscopes (EFMs)
measured frictional drag or other binding forces. Magnetic resonance
force microscopes (MRFM)2776,2929 used a field generated from a
small magnet mounted on the tip of the cantilever arm to probe
nuclear magnetic moments in a small region on the surface of the
sample, imaging atom types and even detecting the spin of a single
electron. By the mid-1990s, AFMs were already a $100 million/
year industry2777 and SPMs generally were an off-the-shelf technology
costing up to $50,000-$500,000 for complete systems, with the
whole industry worth up to ~$0.5 billion annually. (Lowperformance “homebrew,” student,2712 and science-fair STMs have
been built for as little as $50.2778)
How might SPMs be used for molecular manufacturing? In the
crudest approach, SPMs might be employed as nanoscale milling
machines to carve out “nanoparts” from appropriate substrates. For
example, Kim and Lieber16 used an AFM to perform nanomachining
operations on a molybdenum trioxide crystal—applying a 100 nN
load at the tip, they milled a triangular-shaped 50-nm planar chunk
from the crystal, then slid the part 200 nm across the work surface
by pushing it with the AFM tip. Sheehan and Lieber1737,2779 milled
a 50-nm rectangular part and two other parts with concavities
complementary to the rectangle by mechanically etching a MoO3
layer deposited atop an MoS2 surface by pressing down with an
AFM tip at a 50 nN load. Like a numerical-controlled machine
tool, the AFM motions could be programmed to perform a series of
steps, like automatically carving the chemical formula “MoO3” into
the crystal.2779 Nanoparts with features as narrow as 10 nm can be
nanomilled in a limited set of materials [P.E. Sheehan, personal
communication, 1995]. In theory, large arrays of independentlycontrolled SPM tips (see below) could be operated in parallel to
carve out great numbers of similar objects simultaneously, though
such objects would of course not be atomically identical without
further “finishing.” AFM tips have also been used to bulldoze
nanoscale lines and rectangular <10-nm features into
non-conducting photoresist,2752-2754 perform “dip-pen” AFM
nanolithography,2780 form grooves,2781 and fabricate a single-electron
transistor via an STM nano-oxidation process.2782 A carbon
nanotube affixed to an AFM tip was used as a pencil to write
10-nm-wide features onto silicon substrates at ~0.5 mm/sec:2711 An
electric field issues from the nanotube, removing hydrogen atoms
from a hydrogen monolayer atop a silicon base; the exposed silicon
surface oxidized, producing narrow SiO2 tracks.
Perhaps more significantly, SPMs have been employed in an
increasingly sophisticated manner to manipulate individual atoms
and small clusters of atoms. The possibility of modifying surfaces
with scanning probe tips was evident from the earliest years of STM
research, since inadvertent contact between tips and surfaces
routinely caused such modifications,10 and the possibility of
transferring material between tip and sample had already been
discussed.2783 Suggestions for controlled surface modification soon
appeared,2784 and in 1985 Becker and Golovchencko2785 used voltage
pulses on an STM tip to pluck a single germanium atom from the
{111} surface of a sample. In 1988, J. Foster and colleagues2786 at
IBM Almaden pinned small organic molecules to a graphite surface
by applying a small electrical pulse through an STM. Additional
pulses enlarged or erased this molecular feature, and often split the
organic molecule into smaller pieces, though not in a controlled
manner. Other workers used an STM to dump small clusters of
gold atoms on a platinum surface,2736-2739 clusters of copper atoms
on a gold surface,2787 and molecules of tungsten carbide from a supply
flowing over a surface.2788 Others reported positioning carbon monoxide molecules and platinum atoms on platinum surfaces,278 moving
clusters and single atoms of silicon across a silicon surface at room
temperature,2746-2751 and fabricating via STM a “molecular corral”2789
or “quantum corral”2790—a ring of atoms so small that the enclosed
electrons were forced to exhibit quantum behavior. In 1999,
Tomanek and Kral3266 proposed an atomic fountain pen in which a
carbon nanotube filled with atoms is electrically induced to release
these atoms, one by one every 15 microsec, onto the work surface.
More precise control was achieved by Eigler and Schweizer278 at
IBM Almaden in 1989, when they used an STM to position 35
individual xenon atoms on a nickel surface to spell out the corporate
logo “IBM” (Fig. 2.25). To accomplish this, a bias voltage was applied
to weaken the adsorption of each atom to its nickel substrate, then
each atom was dragged, one by one, to the desired locations at a
speed of ~0.4 nm/sec2791 to build a meaningful pattern. It took 22
hours2791 to make the entire logo, or ~38 min/atom. The experiment
had to be carried out at 4 K (i.e., liquid helium temperatures) because
the arrangement would have been unstable at room temperature.
Numerous similar examples of “atomic graffiti”775 followed the IBM
experiment, including atoms patterned in the shape of a world
map;2792 the word “atom”2895 and “nanoworld”,2897 spelled out with
atoms, in Japanese; the word “Peace,” Einstein’s famous equation
Fig. 2.25. IBM logo spelled out using 35 xenon atoms arranged on a
nickel surface by an STM (courtesy of IBM Research Division).
58 Nanomedicine • Volume I
“E=mc2
,” and even a reproduction of the well-known Einstein portrait
with the scientist’s tongue sticking out;300 a sketch of a “molecule
man” using 28 individual CO molecules on a platinum surface;2792
gold nanoparticles spelling out “USC”2793 and “Zyvex”;2794 and
sulfur atoms removed from a surface to make letters 2 nm high.2795
In 1996, Gimzewski’s group1735 used an STM tip to manipulate
individual buckyballs along terraces on a grooved copper plate,
making a “molecular abacus.”
Some variant of an SPM would appear to be the most promising
tool for direct molecular manipulation. Once a tip lies within ~1
nm of a surface, the potential barrier can be lowered sufficiently for
atoms to be induced from the surface by field evaporation;2796 an
applied tip voltage ionizes the atom which can then be guided around
by the tip. Depending on voltage and separation, atoms, atom clusters,
or molecules can be pried out, pushed in, or nudged around on a
surface. By 1998, techniques for direct atomic manipulation proceeded
at room temperature and ~1000 times faster than the original IBM
logo had been assembled. For example, the Nanomanipulator,2716-2724
an interactive haptic control system created by a group at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, allows near-real-time
manipulation of individual gold atoms across a surface using a
hand-held master-slave controller that drives an STM probe while
the position of the atom is displayed on a monitoring screen visible
to the user. Partially funded by NSF, Silicon Graphics, and
TopoMetrix,3156 the Nanomanipulator is a fully-integrated system
that enables investigators to “feel” the interatomic forces as the user
pushes atoms around on a surface.2724 In one demonstration, a
TV-watching user herded a gold atom, slipping and sliding, into a
slot in the planar workplace in about 1 minute; when force feedback was turned off, movements tended to run wild. IBM Almaden
has also experimented with removing individual atoms from metal
surfaces using an STM hooked into a Virtual Reality Dataglove
apparatus.
To manufacture atomically precise parts, it also will be necessary
to manipulate covalent bonds at the probe tip. STMs have broken
and created chemical bonds; ~1 volt pulses were used to pull atoms
out of crystals, binding them to the tip, and then to re-insert them
back into the crystal.2749,2758 In 1995, the first demonstration of
catalysis on a nanometer scale was reported by scientists at the
Molecular Design Institute at LBL.2797 They used an AFM modified
to function like an ultrafine-point pen for catalytic calligraphy to
change the chemical composition of a material surface one molecule at
a time. A surface was prepared as a self-assembled monolayer (SAM)
of alkylazide molecules capped with a crown of three nitrogen atoms,
then platinum-coated chromium was deposited onto an AFM silicon
tip just a few atoms wide. The SAM was soaked with a
hydrogen-containing solvent, then scanned by the AFM over a 100
micron2 area, with the platinum catalyzing a covalent bonding
reaction in which hydrogen was added to the azides, transforming
them into amines as revealed by selective fluorescent tags.
Tip technology is an important and fast-growing subspecialty of
SPM research. In 1990, Drexler and Foster217 suggested the use of
custom-made, synthetic proteins to be mounted on the point of an
SPM tip. Modified antibodies or specially designed proteins
could serve as simple, first-generation “grippers” for binding and
manipulating specific molecules, bringing them into position to react
with other molecules in a precise and selective way. Functionalized
SPM tips have been created to exploit antibody-antigen recognition2798
and in the context of chemical force microscopy.2755,2756 A major
convenience for molecular manipulation is that the same instrument
that does the chemistry and the molecular orienting can also be
used to inspect the results.322
In 1996, Smalley’s group at Rice University2799 attached a single
nanotube to the pyramidal silicon tip of an AFM and showed that
it was quite robust and could image the bottom of deep trenches
inaccessible to conventional tips. By 1998, progress had been made
in functionalized carbon nanotubes for use on AFM tips. Most
notably, Wong and colleagues2800 prepared nanotube tips by oxidation
in air at 700˚C, burning off all but 2% of the original material and
leaving the ends covered with carboxyl (-COOH) groups whose
chemistry is rich and well-understood. Four different kinds of tips
were created: (1) the original carboxyl tip, which is acidic; (2) an
amine-terminated tip (made by forming an amide bond to one of
the amine groups in ethylenediamine (H2NCH2CH2NH2)), which
is basic; (3) a hydrocarbon-terminated tip (made by forming an
amide bond to benzylamine (C6H5CH2NH2)), which is hydrophobic; and (4) a biotin-terminated tip (made by forming an amide
bond to a biotin derivative), which shows specific binding to
streptavidin. AFM contact forces between tips and selected substrates
were shown to be sensitive to pH and to the chemical details of the
substrate in ways consistent with the tips’ intended chemistry.
Wong’s tips had three closely related advantages over previous
techniques. First, when a functional group is attached to the apex of
an Si3N4 or SiO2 tip, these groups usually adhere to the sides of the
tip as well; upon using the tip as a tool, there is a constant hazard
that contact with the sides of the tip will alter the workpiece in
unwanted places. Unlike these tips built with bulk techniques, the
ends of Wong’s tips are very different from their sides—the carboxyl
groups are attached only on the ends of the nanotube, not on the
sides. Second, Wong’s tips have lateral dimensions set by the
nanoscale dimensions of nanotubes, not by top-down fabrication
techniques. Note the authors: “...the small effective radius of
nanotube tips significantly improves resolution beyond what can
be achieved using commercial silicon tips....we have recently
demonstrated that lateral resolution of <3 nm can be achieved by
using COOH-terminated single-walled nanotubes tips”.2740-2742
Third, single-walled nanotube tips are much closer to yielding truly
single atom tips with controlled chemistry than any other alternative.
J. Soreff notes that a (10, 10) nanotube with a 1.4-nm diameter has
just 20 atoms at an open end. Even given a statistical distribution of
tubes with varying numbers of carboxyl groups attached to their
ends, one should be able to build a ligand which covers the whole
end of the tube, yielding a method for ensuring that just one molecule
of known structure and orientation was present at the end of the
probe.
Theoretical studies have employed molecular dynamics simulations
and other techniques to investigate the behavior of mechanosynthetic
tool tips.10,2760,2761,2764,3250 For example, Drexler10 proposed using
an acetylene radical to perform selective abstractions of hydrogen from
a diamond surface (Fig. 2.26A), and this proposal was further studied
in Musgrave’s ab initio quantum chemistry analysis2762 and Sinnott’s
molecular dynamics modeling of the reaction at room temperature
on a diamond {111} surface;2763,2764 other H-abstraction studies
have been done.10,2907 One possible structure for a hydrogen
abstraction tool might be similar to an anthracene whose end had been
modified as shown in Figure 2.26B; prior to use, the structure must be
activated by removal of the terminal hydrogen.1199 Brenner and
colleagues2764 describe further work modeling the parallel abstraction
of several hydrogen atoms from the diamond {111} surface. Such
reactions are similar to those involved in the well-studied chemical
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 59
vapor deposition of diamond,2765-2769 but adding only positional
control and applied mechanical force; more detailed theoretical studies
of diamond mechanosynthesis reactions have begun.2770,3250
R. Merkle2602 has proposed a simple mechanosynthetic system
capable of fabricating a large class of useful stiff hydrocarbons.
Merkle’s system includes positionally-controlled hydrogen abstraction
and deposition tools (to remove or add hydrogen atoms to a
workpiece), carbene and dimer deposition tools (to add one or two
carbons to a workpiece), a silicon radical tool (to remove a carbon),
and four other specialized tools. Each proposed tool has a molecular
handle structure that could be permanently affixed to a suitably
functionalized AFM tip (or other appropriate mechanosynthetic
nanomanipulator). As each operation is performed on the butadiyne*
(a.k.a diacetylene,2801 C4H2) hydrocarbon feedstock in an inert (e.g.,
vacuum or noble gas) environment, one or more tools are brought
to the workpiece at the necessary position and angle, and any necessary
force is applied via the AFM. Interestingly, except for a small number
of “vitamin parts”115 involving transition metals, Merkle’s system
can in theory synthesize all of its own mechanosynthetic tools, thus
establishing net positive production of system components and
illustrating a limited subset-level “quantitative parts closure” as first
defined in 1982 by Freitas and Gilbreath115 in connection with
self-replicating machine systems (Chapter 14). Merkle
acknowledges that several of the proposed reactions involve the
simultaneous coordinated action of two, three, or even four
positionally controlled tools, but suggests that two 6-degree-offreedom manipulators plus some combination of appropriate jigs
and fixtures should be sufficient in a more parsimonious system.
However, steric hindrance of multiple tools at one site also was not
explicitly addressed. Another potential problem to be overcome is
loss of positional registration as the various functionalized tool heads
are changed out at the AFM tip; such tips might be paired with a
second positionally-invariant metrology tip on each tool head,
allowing precise calibration of workspace location before proceeding
back to the workpiece.
Others have suggested fabricating nanoparts by building up
structures by stacking layers of individual atoms, perhaps constrained
by sacrificial joiners and scaffolding, and honed by differential etching
operations.2802
Assuming that “nanoparts” can be fabricated to atomic precision,
can SPMs also be used to assemble these nanoparts into working
nanomachines? Some preliminary work has been accomplished. For
instance, arrays of nanoscale holes have been synthesized that could
serve as “workpiece holders.” In one experiment, C60 buckyballs
were scattered about on a prepared surface, then an AFM pushed
the individual spheres into their own little holes, securely seating
them pending further processing.2630The C60-impregnated perforated
film was so durable that the buckyballs remained trapped after several
months of storage. Similarly, Jung and colleagues in Gimzewski’s
group2803 synthesized 4-legged porphyrin-based2804 molecular
“nanoparts” that were specifically designed for easy positioning on
a copper surface. Pushing with an STM at room temperature, the
authors displaced the ~1.5-nm wide nanoparts in predefined directions
and rotated the 4-legged molecules at will, arranging, for example,
the parts into a precise hexagonal configuration on the copper surface.
The STM has been used to induce, and to view, the rotation of an
individual oxygen molecule trapped on a platinum surface, as it is
intentionally and stably rotated into any one of three distinct
orientations.2805The forces required to slide, or alternatively to roll,
a carbon nanotube across a graphitic surface have been directly
measured by AFM.2717
The first known instance of a crude but purely mechanical
“nanopart” assembly operation was performed in 1995 by Paul E.
Sheehan and Charles M. Lieber.1737 Two nanoscale parts with rectangular slots and a third 50-nm rectangular sliding “latch” member
were milled from a MoO3 crystal using an AFM, then the rectangular
“latch” member was slid repeatedly from one slot to the other using
the same AFM, making a three-nanopart reversible mechanical latch.
Noted the authors: “The lateral force needed to break the latch, 41 nN,
was large considering the small latch contact area, which suggests that
relatively robust assemblies can be created with such devices. Such a
reversible latch could serve as the basis for mechanical logic
gates....Our results...demonstrate the ability to machine complex
shapes and to reversibly assemble these pieces into interlocking
structures.”
In 1998, manipulation of nanoscale parts in the vertical dimension
(e.g., normal to the surface plane) had only just begun.2743-2745 The
first three-dimensional structure built out of single “nanoparts” was
demonstrated in 1997 by Requicha’s group at the USC Laboratory
for Molecular Robotics. First, an AFM was used to push 5-nm gold
nanoparticles in the third dimension up and over surface protrusions
or obstructions—for example, a 5-nm gold particle was shoved up
onto a 2-nm-high protrusion, then slid back off again onto the
surface.2806 In another series of experiments conducted in air at room
temperature with 15-30 nm gold nanoparticles deposited on silicon
previously coated with a silane layer, Requicha’s group used an AFM
to build a simple 3-D pyramidal structure by pushing one gold
“nanopart” on top of two others, then off again; the group also used
the AFM to rotate and translate a dimer unit formed by two linked
“nanoparts”.2807
Fig. 2.26. Schematic of proposed hydrogen abstraction tool (redrawn
from Merkle1199).
*Experimentalists are warned that butadiyne, chemically distinct from the more common molecule butadiene (C4H6), can polymerize explosively under some conditions.2801
60 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Three-dimensional nanoassembly might perhaps be more readily
achieved if nanoparts could assist in their own assembly process.
R. Merkle [personal communication, 1998] suggests that an SPM
could be used to position DNA-tagged molecular building blocks.
A building block tagged with a specific single-stranded DNA should
preferentially adhere to a surface covered with the complementary
DNA. If the building block has a second single-stranded DNA tag
which is complementary to single-stranded DNA on the tip of an
SPM, and if it is initially attached to the SPM tip by this tag, then
it could be positioned by the SPM and attached to the surface. The
relative strength of attachments could be adjusted by changing the
number of base pairs in the complementary region between the two
strands.1066 A related suggestion, due to G. Fahy,322 is that SPM
tips for assembly could be designed with more than one binding
site. The existence of at least two binding sites could allow precise
orientation of a nanopart, permitting the nanopart to be presented
to a desired target site (or another nanopart, possibly attached to
another manipulator) at exactly the location and in exactly the
orientation desired, assuming that each nanopart can bind to each
tip in only one possible orientation. A convenient post-assembly
nanopart release mechanism is also required.
In 1997, the Avouris group2750,2771 at IBM Yorktown Heights
demonstrated that the tip of an atomic force microscope (AFM)
could be used to control the shape and position of individual
multiwalled carbon nanotubes dispersed on a surface. Nanotubes
could be bent, straightened, translated, rotated, and (under certain
conditions) cut.
In 1998, Zyvex LLC (a developmental engineering company
whose goal is to create a molecular assembler capable of manufacturing
atomically precise structures2794) demonstrated the ability to
manipulate carbon nanotubes in three dimensions inside a scanning
electron microscope (SEM) having ~6 nm resolution at near-video
scan rates. Zyvex’s custom piezoelectric vacuum manipulator
achieved positional resolutions comparable to SPMs along with the
ability to manipulate objects along one rotational and three linear
degrees of freedom with 0.1 nm spatial resolution.2808 This prototypical device could probe, select and handle limited classes of
nanometer-scale objects such as carbon nanotubes under real-time
SEM inspection. Carbon nanotubes were attached to commercial
atomic force microscope (AFM) tips either by van der Waals forces
alone or by “nanosoldering” by a concentrated electron beam from
the SEM. Forces applied to the nanotubes could be measured from
the cantilevers’ deflections (spring constants 0.01-100 N/m; see also
Neumister and Ducker2809). Sometimes nanotubes were transferred
from tip to tip. The manipulator could function both as a research
tool for investigating properties of carbon nanotubes and other
nanoscale objects without surface restrictions, and as a rudimentary
building device for larger nanotube assemblies. Zyvex believed that
this capability to select and manipulate nanoscale components and
to examine directly their suitability as construction materials during
various phases of the construction process would play an important
role in enabling the technology of assembling mechanical and
electronic devices from prefabricated components. Most impressively,
the Zyvex system allowed the simultaneous coordinated operation
of three independently controlled AFM tips within the same
workspace, at different orientations. (A four-tip system was
expected to be operational by mid-1999 [Mark Dyer, personal
communication, 1999].) Two-handed coordinated micromanipulation
under the view of an SEM had previously been demonstrated by
others.2810
Tuzun and colleagues2811 calculated the requirements for coaxial
docking of two nanotubes of different diameters to form a molecular
bearing. They looked at bearings formed from nanotubes 11 rings
long, with 10 carbons per ring in the shaft and either 30 or 34
carbons per ring in the sleeve. For the computer simulations, Tuzun
placed the sleeve of the bearing along the z axis and gave the shaft a
small initial velocity towards it. A perfectly aligned shaft falls straight
into a potential well from the van der Waals attraction to the sleeve;
displaced or mis-oriented shafts can bounce off the edge of the sleeve.
The docking envelopes for the molecular dynamics calculations and
for the rigid body calculations had essentially the same shape, but
with slightly different sizes. For the atomistic calculation, a shaft
aligned parallel to the sleeve (with a 30 carbon ring sleeve) can be
displaced by 0.26 nm before it fails to dock, while in the rigid body
calculation the displacement can only be 0.16 nm. The authors note
that “if an end of the shaft points closely enough to the center of the
sleeve, it will fall into the non-bonded potential energy well and the
two nanotubes will dock.” These calculations are important because
they tell us what tolerances can be accepted during the manual
assembly process. Note the authors: “A question just as important
as how to design or operate nanomachines is how to assemble
them”.2811 Interestingly, one of Zyvex’s experiments2808 produced a
multiwalled carbon nanotube that thinned in three steps along its
length, suggesting the most likely explanation that the inner shells
had been pulled from the outer shells. This phenomenon has also
been observed by others and is known as the “sword and sheath”
failure2812—the exact inverse of the purposeful nanotube insertion
operation investigated by Tuzun and colleagues.
In order to produce large numbers of nanoparts and
nano-assemblies, massively parallel SPM arrays and microscale
SPMs2772-2774 would be most convenient. Force-sensing devices such
as piezoelectric,2813 piezoresistive,2814 and capacitive2815 microcantilevers made it possible to construct microscale AFMs on chips
without an external deflection sensor. (We exclude fixed-tip arrays2816
in the following discussion.) In 1995, Itoh and colleagues2817 at the
University of Tokyo fabricated an experimental piezoelectric
ZnO2-on-SiO2 microcantilever array of ten tips on a single silicon
chip. Each cantilever tip lay ~70 microns from its neighbor, and
measured 150 microns long, 50 microns wide and 3.5 microns thick,
or ~26,000 micron3
/device, and each of the devices could be operated
independently in the z-axis (e.g., vertically) up to near their
mechanical resonance frequencies of 145-147 KHz at an actuation
sensitivity of ~20 nm/volt—for instance, 0.3-nm resolution at 125 KHz.
Parallel probe scanning and lithography has been achieved by
Quate’s group at Stanford, which has progressed from simple
piezoresistive microcantilever arrays with 5 tips spaced 100 microns
apart and 0.04-nm resolution at 1 KHz but only one z-axis actuator
for the whole array,2818 to arrays with integrated sensors and actuators
that allow parallel imaging and lithography with feedback and
independent control of each of up to 16 tips, with scanning speeds
up to 3 mm/sec using a piezoresistive sensor.2819,2820 By 1998, Quate’s
group had demonstrated2821-2827,2829 arrays of 50-100 independently
controllable AFM probe tips mounted in 2-D patterns with 60 KHz
resonances, including a 10 x 10 cantilevered tip array fabricated in
closely spaced rows using throughwafer interconnects on a single
chip.
MacDonald’s group at the Cornell Nanofabrication Facility has
pursued similar goals. In 1991, the team fabricated their first
submicron stylus, driven in the xy plane using interdigitating MEMS
comb drives,2830 including the first opposable tip pair (Fig. 2.27).
By 1993, they had produced a 25-tip array on one xyz actuator,2831,2832
and by 1995 a complete working micro-STM (including xy comb
drives) measuring 200 microns on an edge and a micro-AFM
measuring 2 mm on an edge including a 1-mm long cantilever with
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 61
a 20-nm diameter integrated tip on a 6-micron high by 1-micron
diameter support shaft.1749,1974 MacDonald’s group demonstrated
tip arrays with 5 micron spacings, exploiting the same process used
to make the working micro-STM.2833,2834 With the same technology
tips or small arrays of tips could be spaced 25-50 microns apart and
integrated with individual z-axis microactuators, so that one xy-axis
manipulator could support many tips with each tip having a separate z
actuator. By 1997, the group2835 had built and tested an array of
micro-STMs on the surface of an ordinary silicon chip, with each
tip on a cantilever 150 microns long with 3-D sensing and control.
The largest prototype array has 144 probes,2836 arranged in a square
consisting of 12 rows of 12 probes each, with individual probe needles
about 200 microns apart. Further development was to focus on
increasing the range of movement and on fitting more and smaller
probes into the same space.
2.4 Molecular Components and Molecular Assemblers
Assuming that various elementary molecular parts fabrication
and assembly operations can be performed for certain limited classes
of structures, perhaps as described in Section 2.3, then what structures
would be interesting and useful to build? This Section briefly
describes a small set of possibly useful molecular mechanical
components (Section 2.4.1) and then concludes with a discussion
of the concept of the molecular assembler (Section 2.4.2).
2.4.1 Molecular Mechanical Components
In order to lay a foundation for molecular manufacturing, it is
necessary to create and to analyze possible designs for nanoscale
mechanical components that could, in principle, be manufactured.
Because these components could not yet be built in 1998, such
designs could not be subjected to rigorous experimental testing and
validation. Designers were forced instead to rely upon ab initio
structural analysis and computer studies including molecular
dynamics simulations. Noted Drexler:10 “Our ability to model
molecular machines (systems and devices) of specific kinds, designed
in part for ease of modeling, has far outrun our ability to make them.
Design calculations and computational experiments enable the
theoretical studies of these devices, independent of the technologies
needed to implement them.”
In nanoscale design, building materials do not change continuously
as they are cut and shaped, but rather must be treated as being formed
from discrete atoms.2845 A nanoscale component is a supermolecule,
not a finely divided solid. Any stray atoms or molecules within such
a structure may act as dirt that can clog and disable the device, and
the scaling of vibrations, electrical forces, thermal expansion, magnetic
interaction and surface tension with size lead to dramatically different
phenomena as system size shrinks from the macroscale to the
nanoscale.10
Molecular bearings are perhaps the most convenient class of
components to design because their structure and operation is fairly
straightforward. One of the simplest examples is Drexler’s
overlap-repulsion bearing design,10 shown with end views and
exploded views in Figure 2.28 using both ball-and-stick and
space-filling representations. This bearing has exactly 206 atoms
including carbon, silicon, oxygen and hydrogen, and is comprised
of a small shaft that rotates within a ring sleeve measuring 2.2 nm
in diameter. The atoms of the shaft are arranged in a 6-fold symmetry, while the ring has 14-fold symmetry, a combination that provides
low energy barriers to shaft rotation.* Figure 2.29 shows an exploded
view of a 2808-atom strained-shell** sleeve bearing designed by
Drexler and Merkle10 using molecular mechanics force fields to
ensure that bond lengths, bond angles, van der Waals distances,
and strain energies are reasonable. This 4.8-nm diameter bearing
features an interlocking-groove interface which derives from a modified diamond {100} surface. Ridges on the shaft interlock with ridges
on the sleeve, making a very stiff structure. Attempts to bob the
shaft up or down, or rock it from side to side, or displace it in any
direction (except axial rotation, wherein displacement is
extremely smooth) encounter a very strong resistance.279 Whether
these bearings would have to be assembled in unitary fashion, or
instead could be assembled by inserting one part into the other without
damaging either part, had not been extensively studied or modeled
by 1998.
Molecular gears are another convenient component system for
molecular manufacturing design-ahead. For example, Drexler and
Merkle10 designed a 3557-atom planetary gear, shown in side-, end-,
and exploded views in Figure 2.30. The entire assembly has twelve
moving parts and is 4.3 nm in diameter and 4.4 nm in length, with
a molecular weight of 51,009.844 daltons and a molecular volume
of 33.458 nm3
. An animation of the computer simulation shows
Fig. 2.27. Schematic of an opposable STM tip pair (redrawn from Yao,
Arney and MacDonald2830).
*At the atomic scale, the two opposing surfaces have periodic bumps and hollows, but the periods of these bumps are different for the two surfaces—that is, they are
“incommensurate.”10,3243 Two incommensurate surfaces cannot lock up in any particular position, hence the barrier to free rotation is very low, on the order of ~0.001 kT (thermal
noise at room temperature).280
**Components of high rotational symmetry may consist of (a) intrinsically curved, (b) strained-shell, or (c) special-case structures.10 In the case of (b), the bearing illustrated
in Figure 2.29 has bond strains of around ~10% (~38 zJ/atom), and similar hydrocarbon bearings have been designed with bond strains of ~5% (~11 zJ/atom) [R. Merkle,
personal communication, 1998]. For comparison, strain energies1866,2615 are  3 zJ/atom for diamond lattice, ~25 zJ/atom in C240, ~7-27 zJ/atom in the walls of infinite carbon
nanotubes of diameter 0.7-1.3 nm, up to ~59 zJ (13% strain) for some bonds around a Lomer dislocation in diamond,2861 ~70 zJ/atom in C60, and at least ~80 zJ/atom for
C36. Fullerenes are among the most highly strained natural molecules ever isolated. For symmetrical diamondoid structures with negligible hoop stress, permissible bond strains
may in theory be as large as ~140 zJ/atom producing a ~23% bond strain;10 nanotube breaking strain is 20-30% for various chiral forms, and buckling strain is ~8% in axial
compression. Bond strain in a simple strained-shell bearing can be lowered by making the bearing bigger, thereby reducing the curvature. Thus strained shell bearings are feasible,
although in 1998 it remained unclear exactly how small they could be before becoming unstable.
62 Nanomedicine • Volume I
the central shaft rotating rapidly and the peripheral output shaft
rotating slowly. The small planetary gears rotate around the central
shaft, and they are surrounded by a ring gear that holds the planets
in place and ensures that all of the components move in the proper
fashion. The ring gear is a strained silicon shell with sulfur atom
termination; the sun gear is a structure related to an
oxygen-terminated diamond {100} surface; the planet gears resemble
multiple hexasterane structures with oxygen rather than CH2 bridges
between the parallel rings; and the planet carrier is adapted
from a Lomer-dislocation2894 array created by R. Merkle and
L. Balasubramaniam, and linked to the planet gears using C-C
bonded bearings. View (c) retains the elastic deformations that are
hidden in (a)—the gears are bowed. In the macroscale world, planetary
gears are used in automobiles and other machines where it is necessary
to transform the speeds of rotating shafts.
W. Goddard and colleagues at CalTech2844,2845 performed a
rotational impulse dynamics study of this “first-generation” planetary
gear. At the normal operational rotation rates for which this component was designed (e.g., <1 GHz for <10 m/sec interfacial velocities),
the gear worked as intended and did not overheat.2844 Started from
room temperature, the gear took a few cycles to engage, then
rotated thermally stably at ~400 K. However, when the gear was
driven to ~100 GHz, significant instabilities appeared although the
device still did not self-destruct.2844 One run at ~80 GHz showed
excess kinetic energy causing gear temperature to oscillate up to
450 K above baseline.2845 One animation of the simulation shows
that the ring gear wiggles violently because it is rather thin. In an
actual nanorobot incorporating numerous mechanical components,
the ring gear would be part of a larger wall that would hold it solidly in
place and would eliminate these convulsive motions which, in any
case, are seen in the simulation only at unrealistically high operating
frequencies.
Drexler and Merkle2847 later proposed a “second-generation”
planetary gear design (Fig. 2.31) with 4235 atoms, a molecular
Fig. 2.29. Exploded view of a 2808-atom strained-shell sleeve bearing
(courtesy of K.E. Drexler10).
Fig. 2.30. End-, side- and exploded-view of a 3557-atom planetary gear
(courtesy of K.E. Drexler10).
Fig. 2.28. End views and exploded views of a 206-atom overlaprepulsion bearing (courtesy of K.E. Drexler10).
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 63
weight of 72,491.947 daltons and a molecular volume of 47.586
nm3
. This new version was indeed more stable but still had too
much slip at the highest frequencies. Commenting on the ongoing
design effort, Goddard2845 suggested that an optimal configuration
could have the functionality of a planetary gear but might have an
appearance completely different from the macroscopic system, and
offered an example: “Because a gear tooth in the xy plane cannot be
atomically smooth in the z-direction, we may develop a Vee design
so that the Vee shape of the gear tooth in the z-direction nestles
within a Vee notch in the race to retain stability in the z-direction as
the teeth contact in the xy plane. This design would make no sense
for a macroscopic gear system since the gear could never be placed
inside the race. However, for a molecular system one could imagine
that the gear is constructed and that the race is constructed all
except for a last joining unit. The parts could be assembled and
then the final connections on the face made to complete the
design” analogous to the ZARBI system of Rebek.131
Another class of nanodevice that has been designed is a
gas-powered molecular motor or pump.2858 The pump and chamber
wall segment shown in Figure 2.32 contain 6165 atoms with a
molecular weight of 88,190.813 daltons and a molecular volume of
63.984 nm3
. The device can serve either as a pump for neon gas
atoms or (if run backwards) as a motor that can convert neon gas
pressure into rotary power. The helical rotor has a grooved cylindrical
bearing surface at each end, supporting a screw-threaded cylindrical
segment in the middle. In operation, rotation of the shaft moves a
helical groove past longitudinal grooves inside the pump housing.
There is room enough for small gas molecules only where facing
grooves cross, and these crossing points move from one side to the
other as the shaft turns, moving the neon atoms along. Goddard2845
reported that preliminary molecular dynamics simulations of the
device showed that it could indeed function as a pump, although
“structural deformations of the rotor can cause instabilities at low
and high rotational frequencies. The forced translations show that
at very low perpendicular forces due to pump action, the total energy
rises significantly and again the structure deforms.” Merkle
acknowledged that the pump moves neon atoms at an energy cost
of 185 Kcal/mole-Angstrom (12,900 zJ/atom-nm), which is not
very energy-efficient. Further refinement of this crude design is
clearly warranted.
Conveyor systems would also be useful. Employing a primitive
molecular CAD software package called Crystal Sketchpad, G.
Leach2861 created a design for a 5-nanopart, ~2500-atom conveyor
belt system comprised of two rollers, two axles, and a belt consisting of
a strained thin-walled diamond sheet. The design has not been
subjected to further computational analysis, either to minimize
rotational energy barriers or to optimize rotational dynamics or
operational stability.
Drexler and Merkle2859 have also produced a preliminary design
for a 2596-atom fine-motion controller (Fig. 2.33). A
general-purpose molecular assembler arm must be able to move its
“hand” by many atomic diameters, position it with fractionalatomic-diameter accuracy, and then execute finely-controlled
motions, perhaps to transfer one or a few atoms in a guided chemical
reaction. Human arms use large muscles and joints for large
motions and more finely-controlled finger motions for precision;
the device presented here can execute precise finger-like motions
over several atomic diameters with associated 90-degree rotations.
The core of the device consists of a shaft linking two hexagonal
endplates, sandwiching a stack of eight rings, making a modified
Stewart platform (Section 9.3.1.5). In a complete system, each ring
would be rotated by a lever driven by a cam mechanism. Each ring
supports a strut linked to a central platform (here shown raised,
Fig. 2.31. Side and top views of a 4235-atom “second generation”
planetary gear (courtesy of K.E. Drexler and R.C. Merkle2847).
Fig. 2.32. Side views of a 6165-atom neon gas pump/motor (courtesy
of K.E. Drexler and R.C. Merkle2858).
Pump with
Chamber Wall
Helical Rotor
Fig. 2.33. Side view of a 2695-atom fine motion controller (courtesy of
K.E. Drexler and R.C. Merkle2859).
64 Nanomedicine • Volume I
displaced, and twisted). Rotating a ring moves a strut; moving a
strut moves the platform; positioning all eight rings
(over-)determines a platform position in x, y, z, roll, pitch, and yaw.
(If the struts were rigid, six would do the job; here, two struts have
been added to increase stiffness.) Notes Drexler: “The chief design
problem is to enable an adequate range of motion without mechanical
interference or unacceptable bond strains, and within the size
constraints set by available modeling tools and patience.”
Almost all current design research in molecular nanotechnology
is restricted to computer simulation, which allows the design and
testing of large structures or complete nanomachines, and the
compilation of growing libraries of molecular designs. The work is
relatively inexpensive and does not require the support of a large
team. Of course, calculations of many-body systems are notoriously
difficult, with many computer packages making a number of
simplifying assumptions—e.g., nuclei as point masses, electrons
treated as a continuous charge distribution, and 3-D potential energy
functions derived semi-empirically from experimental data and
treated as a classical field despite their true quantum mechanical
character (for ease of computation). Notwithstanding these shortcuts,
Tuzun and colleagues2664 claim that classical simulations may overestimate the rate of energy transfer between vibrational modes even
at low energies, in which case “current designs for various
nanocomponents [would] actually perform better and be more stable
than recent molecular dynamics simulations suggest.”
Goddard2853 notes that future nanosystem simulations may
require 1-100 million atoms to be considered explicitly, demanding
major improvements in molecular dynamics methodologies. By
1998, new algorithms for parallel processing of massive molecular
dynamics simulations were being developed,2854 producing methods
and optimized parallelized computer programs efficient for high
capacity molecular dynamics simulations of 10,000-1,000,000
atoms for finite molecular structures.
Ultimately, Computer-Aided (Molecular) Design (CAD) systems2861
will be needed to efficiently design and analyze molecular components
and their higher-order assemblies. CAD systems are commonplace
in macroscale engineering and architecture, as are Computer-Aided
Manufacturing (CAM) systems in macroscale manufacturing. In
the molecular realm, Computer Aided Synthesis Design (CASD)*
has been avidly pursued by computational chemists since the 1980s,
and by 1998 many university and commercial molecular modeling
software packages were already well-known, including Alchemy
(Tripos Inc.; www.tripos.com), Cerius2 (Molecular Simulations Inc.;
www.msi.com), Chem3D (CambridgeSoft; www.camsoft.com),
Conformer (Princeton Simulations; www.conformer.com),
Gaussian94 (Gaussian Inc.; www.gaussian.com), Hyperchem
(Hypercube Inc.; www.hyper.com), Molecular Operating Environment
(Chemical Computing Group Inc.; www.chemcomp.com),
MOPAC97 (Fujitsu Ltd.; www.winmopac.com), RealMol/CAVE/
NAMD (Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics;
www.igd.fhg.de/www/igd-a4/research/chemie), Sculpt (Interactive
Simulations Inc.; www.intsim.com/products/index.htm), and Spartan
(Wavefunction Inc.; www.wavefun.com).
In 1998, the capacity of such systems to design and manipulate
large nanoscale mechanical components was extremely limited. A
few very primitive molecular nanotechnology design packages had
been attempted, including Crystal Sketchpad,2861 DiamondCAD
(www.zyvex.com/diamond.html), Molecular Assembly Sequence
Software (www.carol.com/mass.shtml), Molecular Modelling Toolkit
(starship.python.net/crew/hinsen/mmtk.html), and NanoCAD
(world.std.com/~wware/ncad.html). The possible design of molecules
for specific purposes using genetic software techniques had also been
investigated.2955
2.4.2 Molecular Assemblers
Drexler8-10 has proposed the molecular assembler,** a device
resembling an industrial robot which would be capable of holding
and positioning reactive moieties in order to control the precise
location at which chemical reactions take place. This general approach
would allow the construction of large atomically precise objects by
a sequence of precisely controlled chemical reactions. Much like
the ribosome in biology (Section 2.3.1), an assembler would build
various classes of useful molecular structures following a sequence
of instructions. During this process, the assembler would provide
three-dimensional positional and full orientational control over the
molecular component (analogous to the individual amino acid in
the ribosome model) that is being added to a growing complex
molecular structure (analogous to the growing polypeptide in the
ribosomal model). In one approach, a molecular assembler may be
capable of forming any one of several different kinds of chemical
bonds (e.g., by changing tool tips), not just a single kind such as the
peptide bond that the ribosome makes. In bonding atoms or
molecules to one another, the assembler would provide any needed
energy (especially if the reaction happens not to be energetically
favored) through physical force, thus performing mechanosynthesis
(as opposed to the traditional means of chemical synthesis in solution).
In another approach, a molecular assembler might be capable only
of noncovalent assembly operations, wherein nanoparts are fabricated
by other means and then presented to the assembler, which assembles
the nanoparts into working nanomachines.
The first simple molecular assembler will almost certainly be a
macroscale device, perhaps a modified SPM system as was being
pursued by Zyvex2794 in 1998. Multiple SPM heads could be
equipped with a small number of nanoscale tool tips. In one scenario,
nanoparts fabricated using bulk chemistry techniques would be
inspected and selected by the SPM, then assembled one by one into
working nanomachines (e.g., the desired useful nanoscale products).
Such assembly operations will be very slow, because the placement
of each new component may require simultaneous rotations and
translations of large macroscale SPM components. Assembly time
scales roughly linearly with assembler size10 because smaller assembler
components moving at a given velocity need to travel less distance
to accomplish a given physical operation, hence consuming less time
and energy per physical operation. An important early developmental
goal thus will be to design and fabricate nanoscale molecular
assemblers.
*Existing CASD software/database packages include CAMEO (reaction chemistry assistant; William L. Jorgensen, Yale Univ.; zarbi.chem.yale.edu/programs/cameo.html), CAS
(reaction data base; www.cas.org/CASFILES/casreact.html)), Chiron (retrosynthetic analysis of chiral precursors; Steve Hanessian, Univ. of Montreal; www.netsci.org/
Resources/Software/Cheminfo/chiron.html), CIARA (Vogel Scientific Software Inc.; www.vogelscientific.com), Crossfire (Computer Assisted Synthesis, Beilstein Information
Systems; www.beilstein.com), EROS (Johann Gasteiger, Erlangen University; schiele.organik.uni-erlangen.de), LAHSA (retrosynthetic analysis; Alan Long, Harvard University;
long@midas.harvard.edu), REACCS (MDL Information Systems Inc.; www.mdli.com), SYNGEN (Jim Hendrickson, Brandeis University; syngen2.chem.brandeis.edu/
syngen.html), SYNLIB (W. Clark Still, Columbia University), and SYNTREE (Trinity Software Inc.; www.trinitysoftware.com/Trinity/orgchem/SYNTREE.HTM).
**But not a “universal” assembler: “Though assemblers will be powerful (and could even be directed to expand their own toolkits by assembling new tools), they will not be
able to build everything that could exist” (Drexler8 at page 246). The term “universal assembler” appears only in a section heading in Drexler’s popular work Engines of Creation8
but not in the text; the term appears nowhere in Drexler’s technical work Nanosystems.10
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 65
At its most basic level, the simplest possible nanoscale molecular
assembler may be comprised of one or more nanoscale manipulators
(Section 9.3). For example, the diamondoid telescoping manipulator
arm described in Section 9.3.1.4 (Figs. 9.8 and 9.9) has about 4
million atoms excluding the base and control and power structures;
doubling the size to account for support structures gives a molecular
weight per arm of ~100 megadaltons and a total molecular volume
of ~140,000 nm3
. Designed for high strength and stiffness, this
robot arm should be able to hold a molecular fragment stiffly enough
to make it react with a chosen end of a carbon-carbon double bond
with an error rate of only 10-15.
10The robot arm could guide chemical
reactions with high reliability at room temperature in vacuo, with
little need for sensing the positions of the molecules with which it is
working.279 Alternatively, with appropriate tool tips, such an arm
could grasp and manipulate individual prefabricated nanoparts in
solution phase. Assembly of nanoparts without fabrication may require
only a very small tool set.
The manipulator arm must be driven by a detailed sequence of
control signals, just as the ribosome needs mRNA to guide its
actions. However, such detailed control signals can be provided by
external acoustic, electrical, or chemical signals that are received by
the robot arm via an onboard sensor or power transducer, using a
simple “broadcast architecture”10,280,2872 (Chapter 12), a technique
which can also be used to import power (e.g., Section 6.3.3). Such
transducers may be extremely small, on the order of (~10 nm)3 each.10
Interestingly, the biological cell may be regarded as an example of a
broadcast architecture:2872 the nucleus, located external to the
cytoplasm, broadcasts mRNA chemical signals to millions of spatially
diverse cytoplasmic ribosomes, thereby remotely controlling the
construction of cellular proteins.
Thus a two-armed mechanical molecular assembler that receives
power and instructions from some external agency may have a total
molecular volume of ~300,000 nm3 (a cube ~67 nm on an edge),
containing ~16 million atoms with a molecular weight of ~200
megadaltons—very roughly the mass and scale of a medium-size
virus particle, such as an adenovirus. For comparison, the average
enzyme (a biochemical crimping tool) weighs about ~0.1 megadalton,
while a typical ribosome (a primitive “protein assembler”) weighs ~4.2
megadaltons. A simple mechanical assembler in the 10-100
megadalton range cannot be ruled out. However, such a device might
have a very small set of tool tips and an extremely limited manufacturing repertoire.
Multiple nanoscale assemblers each capable of independent
simultaneous actuation may require control signals more conveniently
provided by an onboard nanocomputer (Section 10.2). This
programmable nanocomputer must be able to accept stored
instructions which are sequentially executed to direct the manipulator
arm to place the correct moiety or nanopart in the desired position
and orientation, thus giving precise control over the timing and
locations of chemical reactions or assembly operations. The
mechanical nanocomputer analyzed by Drexler10 requires ~16 nm3
per logic gate and ~40 nm3 per data register. If such components
could be used to construct the equivalent of the most primitive
4-bit Intel 4004 microprocessor, then the nanocomputer could process
~105 bits/sec (~25,000 ops/sec) at a ~1 KHz clock speed within a
mechanism volume of ~36,000 nm3 (Section 10.2.1), again neglecting
power supply, I/O linkages, and the like. An additional ~160,000
nm3 of rod logic registers (Section 10.2.1) adds ~1 kilobyte of
onboard RAM memory or ~40 kilobytes of internal tape memory
(conservatively assuming a tape storage density comparable to linear
DNA). (A memory tape containing all bits needed for complete
self-description (Table 2.1) may be considerably longer, even allowing
for substantial data compression.) Doubling the total volume to
account for support structure and other overhead gives a minimum
mechanical nanocomputer molecular volume of ~400,000 nm3
,
roughly 70 million atoms with a molecular weight of ~800
megadaltons. Thus the smallest nanocomputer-driven nanoscale
molecular assembler with two manipulator arms may have a total
molecular volume of ~700,000 nm3 (a cube ~88 nm on an edge),
containing ~86 million atoms with a molecular weight of ~1
gigadalton.
By 1998, only a small amount of research targeted at actual
assembler design had begun. Following Drexler’s original discussions,8-10
during 1991-1998 R. Merkle authored or co-authored a continuing
series of papers discussing various operational aspects and specific
components of assembler design, including mechanosynthetic
positional control,2761,2762 general design considerations for
assemblers,280,2868 the broadcast architecture,2872 convergent assembly,2869
binding sites,1199 positioning devices,1239 mechanosynthetic path
sets,2602 designs for a neon pump2858 and a fine motion controller,2859
and possible assembler casings.2281 J.S. Hall has considered high-level
designs for a nanoscale parts-fabrication and parts-assembly
nanorobot.2870 Zyvex,2794 founded in 1996 by James von Ehr, has
set itself the task of building the first programmable nanoassembler
in a 5-10 year time frame (e.g., by ~2006). W. Goddard and
colleagues2853 have proposed a series of molecular dynamics
simulations of simple assemblers, although by 1998 these studies
evidently had not yet begun. According to Goddard’s original proposal:
“Ultimately we need a programmable synthetic system to make a real
device. Even though we may not have tools for all the chemical steps
and may not have designs for all the pumps, engines, and transmissions
needed, we propose to study the dynamics of simplified prototype assemblers.
In these studies we anticipate having (1) a reservoir or supplies area for
providing the various building units (atoms and fragments) required,
(2) a work area in which we construct the nanomachine device (initially
we will consider assembling the structure on top of a diamond surface),
and (3) a molecular scale nano-hand which will extract the atoms from
(1) and carry them to (2). We will then use extensions of our massive
Table 2.1 Information Required to Describe Some SelfReplicating Systems
# of Bits Needed
Self-Replicating System to Specify System References
Penrose ratcheting 2-blocks 0.238 x 103 2879
Rebek’s self-replicating molecules ~1 x 103 131,2452
Human PrP protein (prion) 1.5 x 103 2877,2878
Ebola virus 25.4 x 103 2875
Penrose ratcheting 12-blocks ~49 x 103 2880,2881
Typical human ribosome 280 x 103 997
von Neuman’s Universal Constructor ~500 x 103 280,1985
1988 Internet Worm ~500 x 103 280,2874
Pyrenomas salina (algae) 1.32 x 106 997
M. capricolum (mycoplasma) 1.448-2.2 x 106 2876
E. coli (bacterium) 8.4 x 106 997
S. cerevisiae (yeast) 26 x 106 997
D. melanogaster (insect) 280 x 106 997
200-megadalton 2-arm nanoassembler 384 x 106 Section 2.4.2
1-gigadalton 2-arm nanoassembler 2.32 x 109 Section 2.4.2
G. domesticus (bird) 2.4 x 109 997
X. laevis (amphibian) 6.2 x 109 997
H. sapiens (human genome) 6.6 x 109 997
Various flowering plant species 0.12-220 x 109 997
NASA Lunar Manufacturing Facility 272 x 109 115
66 Nanomedicine • Volume I
molecular dynamics program to operate the system: moving the tip from
reservoir to work area, moving it to contact the appropriate surface site,
moving it to regenerate the active tip, and then moving it back to add
new atoms and molecules. This will include proper temperature effects,
molecular vibrations, energy release upon the various chemical steps,
etc. The ground rules here are that a realistic force field be used and that
all pieces be treated at the atomic level (but some might be semi-rigid).
This will use the force field developed for nanosynthesis. The purpose of
these simulations is to examine issues of vibration caused by chemical
forces as the tool picks up and delivers atoms to the growing surface.
Also we want to consider the effect of energy release in the chemical steps
on the thermal fluctuations in these systems (which may cause
displacements and vibrations).”
Building mega-atom or giga-atom nanoproducts one at a time
would be incredibly expensive and time consuming. For example,
imagine that we wish to construct a simple medical nanorobot such
as the 1-micron spherical respirocyte1400 described in Chapter 22,
which consists of ~18 billion atoms (dry structure). A factory
employing a coordinated team of 100 macroscale SPM assemblers,
each able to place ~1 atom/sec-SPM on a convergently-assembled
workpiece achieves a pitiful manufacturing throughput rate of ~2
respirocytes per decade. Nanoscale assemblers with appendages ~106
times smaller than macroscale SPM assemblers might plausibly
achieve net assembly rates of ~106 atoms/sec-nanoassembler, but
even a production line employing ~300 such nanoassemblers (which
the abovementioned 100-SPM factory team could build in ~1 year,
assuming ~107 atoms/nanoassembler) can only manufacture ~1
respirocyte nanorobot per minute. At that rate, it would take ~2
million years to build the first ~1 cm3 therapeutic dosage containing
~1012 respirocyte nanorobots.
The necessary solution to this mass-production bottleneck is to
employ any of several massively parallel approaches to manufacturing,
including such techniques as self-assembly (Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2),
convergent assembly,10,2869 or, most usefully, self-replication
(Chapter 14). The basic advantage of self-replication is readily
illustrated. Consider a single ~108
-atom “seed” nanoassembler (having
an onboard nanocomputer) that has been painstakingly built in ~106
sec using the abovementioned 100-SPM macroscale assembler team,
working at ~1 atom/sec-SPM. The seed nanoassembler is first programmed to build a copy of itself, which it accomplishes (working at
~106 atoms/sec-nanoassembler) in ~100 sec. These two
nanoassemblers then each build a copy of themselves in another
~100 sec; now there are four nanoassemblers. After ~48 generations,
requiring a total of ~80 minutes to complete, there are ~3 x 1014
nanoassemblers.* These nanoassemblers are then reprogrammed for
the manufacture of 18-billion-atom respirocytes and are fed the
appropriate, presumably different, feedstock. This vastly expanded
nanoassembler manufacturing system can now produce ~1012
respirocytes (~1 cm3
 therapeutic dose) per minute.
The design of machines able to make copies of themselves was
first described by von Neumann.1985 Many variations on this theme
have been reviewed by Freitas and Gilbreath115 and Sipper,2871 and
design for self-replication in the context of nanoscale assemblers
has been considered by Drexler,8-10 Merkle,116,2868,2872,2873 and
Hall.2870 As Drexler10 notes: “It may seem somehow paradoxical
that a machine can contain all the instructions needed to make a
copy of itself, including those selfsame complex instructions, but
this is easily resolved. In the simplest approach, the machine reads
the instructions twice: first as commands to be obeyed, and then as
data to be copied. Adding more data does not increase the complexity
of the data-copying process, hence the set of instructions can be
made as complex as is necessary to specify the rest of the system. By
the same token, the instructions transmitted in a replication cycle
can specify the construction of an indefinitely large number of other
artifacts.”
The estimated information content of self-replicating systems—
the length of the instruction tape—can be surprisingly small (Table
2.1). Von Neumann’s original analysis1985 concluded that perhaps
twelve different kinds of units of unknown complexity could be
required as building materials, and Haldane2884 inferred that as many
as ~105 individual parts might be needed to make a replicator. This
inference was refuted just three years later with the arrival of the
first in a stream of very simple but ingenious designs for mechanical
self-replicating machines that were assembled and operated in the
late 1950s. In the first example,2879 a pair of joined ratchetlike
blocks,2886 when placed in a “sea” of left and right blocks and then
physically agitated, replicated itself from this well-ordered input
substrate, making more block-pairs until all the single blocks were
used up, a process similar to chemical autocatalysis. More complex
congeries of blocks, including clever four-block, eight-block, and
12-block replicators that could replicate themselves in a sea of blocks
were presented by Penrose.2880,2881 Jacobson2882 demonstrated a
3-unit replicator consisting of toy train engines circulating on HO
model railroad tracks, and Morowitz2883 designed a simple two-unit
device with one unit comprised of about a dozen components including switches, batteries and electromagnets, that could assemble
copies of itself from parts floating on the water surface of a bathtub.
In 1998, Lohn and colleagues2885 gave two designs for simple
self-replicating systems that could be constructed out of wood,
batteries and electromagnets, with explicit analogies to nanoscale
fabrication. Several important conclusions may be drawn from these
examples:
First, replication is fundamentally so simple a task that machines
capable of displaying this behavior pre-date most of the modern
electronic computer era.
Second, assembly is an inherently simpler operation than
fabrication. A complex part may embody hundreds or thousands of
prior fabrication and assembly operations, yet may be installed within
an assemblage in a single step. Hence nanopart assembly may be an
easier candidate for early implementation in first-generation
self-replicating molecular manufacturing systems than is molecular
fabrication.
Third, and most important, the simplest nanoreplicator may
require the ability to assemble, but not to (atomically) fabricate, in
order to replicate itself. A nanomachine capable of assembly alone
can replicate itself only from a very limited set of well-ordered input
materials of relatively high complexity, but such a machine can be
extremely simple both in structure and function. Certainly a
nanomachine capable of both assembly and fabrication can replicate
itself from a more diverse and disordered set of more elementary
input materials—but only at the expense of far greater internal
structural and functional complexity.
At least two distinct models of replication have been identified
in replicating systems design.115 The first model may be called the
“unit replication” or organismic model (Fig. 2.34), in which the
replicator is an independent unit which employs the surrounding
substrate to directly produce an identical copy of itself; both the
original and the copy remain fertile and may replicate again, thus
*Numerous complexities and limitations have been ignored here. For example, exponential growth cannot continue indefinitely in a finite environment with limited materials
transport speeds—e.g., a 2-nm wide nanopart suspended in 310 K water diffuses only ~26 nm in 10-6 sec (Eqn. 3.1). Mechanical replicating systems designed purely for molecular
manufacturing may be inflexible and brittle, employing limited energy resources and materials feedstocks not found outside of the immediate manufacturing environment.
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 67
exponentiating their numbers. The second model may be called the
“unit growth” or factory model (Fig. 2.35), in which a population
of specialist devices, each one individually incapable of
self-replication, can collectively fabricate and assemble all necessary
components comprising all specialist devices within the system,
hence the factory is capable of expanding its size (or of manufacturing duplicate factory systems) indefinitely in an appropriate
environment. The factory model is sometimes called “bootstrapping,”
which is any production of more productive capacity, from less. T.
McKendree [personal communication, 1999] likens the situation
to an ant colony: “There necessarily is the line of reproducing queens,
making a sufficient number of ants feasible; [however,] most of the
queen’s products are ‘workers’ that perform useful functions, but
themselves are incapable of reproduction.”
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that mechanical medical
nanodevices will not self-replicate inside the human body, nor will
they have any need for self-replication themselves (Section 1.3.3).
Machines that perform medical tasks are fundamentally different
from machines that manufacture other machines. As R. Merkle
explains:2873 “While self-replicating systems are the key to low cost
[manufacture], there is no need (and little desire) to have such systems
function in the outside world. Instead, in an artificial and controlled
environment they can manufacture simpler and more rugged systems
that can then be transferred to their final destination. Medical devices
designed to operate in the human body don’t have to self-replicate:
we can manufacture them in a controlled environment and then
inject them into the patient as needed. The resulting medical device
will be simpler, smaller, more efficient and more precisely designed
for the task at hand than a device designed to perform the same
function and self-replicate. This conclusion should hold generally:
optimize [product] device design for the desired function, manufacture
the [product] device in an environment optimized for manufacturing,
then transport the [product] device from the manufacturing
environment to the environment for which it was designed. A single
device able to do everything would be harder to design and less
efficient.”
In an effort to stimulate scientific and engineering interest in
constructing the first nanoassembler, in November 1995 the
Foresight Institute created the $250,000 Feynman Grand Prize,2860
with funding contributed by Zyvex founder James von Ehr and
St. Louis venture capitalist Marc Arnold. The prize will be awarded
to the individual or group that first achieves both of two significant
nanotechnology breakthroughs—first, the design and construction
of a functional nanometer-scale robotic arm, and second, the design
and construction of a functional 8-bit adder computing nanodevice.
According to Grand Prize rules, the robotic nanomanipulator must
fit entirely inside a 100-nm cube, carry out actions directed by
input signals of specified types, be able to move to a directed
sequence of positions anywhere within a 50-nm cube, complete all
directed actions with a positioning accuracy of 0.1 nanometer or
better, and perform at least 1,000 accurate, nanometer-scale
positioning motions per second for at least 60 consecutive seconds.
The adder must fit entirely within a 50-nm cube, and must be capable
of adding accurately any pair of 8-bit binary numbers, discarding
overflow, accepting input signals of specified types, and producing
its output as a pattern of raised nanometer-scale bumps on an
atomically precise and level surface. (J.S. Hall notes that a
conventional 8-bit adder may be constructed using a total of 94
AND, OR, and NOT gates; using XOR gates, the total may be
reduced to 37 gates.) Both devices may accept inputs from acoustic,
electrical, optical, diffusive chemical, or mechanical means, although
Fig. 2.34. Schematic example of unit replication (courtesy of K.E.
Drexler, C. Peterson and G. Pergamit9
). A) nanocomputer; B) stored
instructions; C) fuel intake, power supply; D) motor; E) machinery for
raw materials processing. Fig. 2.35. Schematic example of unit growth: nanoassembler fabricating
a nanocomputer in the factory model (courtesy of K.E. Drexler, C.
Peterson and G. Pergamit9
).
68 Nanomedicine • Volume I
any mechanical driving mechanism used for input must be limited
to a single linkage that either slides or rotates on a single axis. To
demonstrate the capacity for mass-production, at least 32 copies of
each device must be provided for analysis and destructive testing by
judges.
Once nanoassemblers are available, the design of far more complex
nanomachines each containing tens or hundreds of billions of
precisely arranged atoms will require new molecular CAD (Section
2.4.1) tools and techniques, including automated hierarchical design
decomposition of objects (that must be built up from an array of
nanoparts) and a shape description language.10 Nanosystem design
compilers, conceptually similar to silicon compilers that generate a
complex pattern of transistors and conductors from an abstract
specification of the properties of a digital circuit, will also be
required for efficient nanorobot design.10 Given a fully specified
design that meets all constraints necessary to physically permit
assembly, all operations of the assembly process must be specified
using an assembly-process compiler. Explains Drexler:10 “The design
of structures and assembly procedures by hierarchical decomposition
directly generates a tree of assembly steps. If this tree has been chosen to
generate parts of the appropriate sizes and numbers, then it can be
mapped onto a manufacturing layout. The vast number of
manipulator motions to be specified at the finest, earliest, and mostdispersed levels of the assembly process can be planned in parallel
by identical software systems running almost independently on
separate processors. The result of this parallel assembly-process
compilation is a set of instructions that, when executed by the transportation system and manipulator controllers of a manufacturing
mechanism, will result in the assembly of an object corresponding
to the initial design.” Scale-up to larger systems, including the control,
coordination, and programming of large aggregates of cooperating
nanorobots, is discussed in Volume II.
Since molecular manufacturing systems can be used to make more
molecular manufacturing systems, it is believed that the capital costs
of production can be quite low. Drexler73 claims that an analysis of
inputs, outputs, and productivity suggests the total cost of production
can be in the range familiar in agriculture and in the production of
industrial chemicals—on the order of tens of cents per pound.
Merkle262 has made similar assertions, for example: “Eventually (after
amortization of possibly quite high development costs), the price of
assemblers (and of the objects they build) should be no higher than
the price of other complex structures made by self-replicating systems.
Potatoes—which have a staggering design complexity involving tens
of thousands of different genes and different proteins directed by
many megabits of genetic information—cost well under a dollar
per pound.” Such analogies from conventional agriculture or industrial
chemistry are not strictly applicable to the medical products and
pharmaceutical areas, where structural precision, product repeatability,
and intensive quality control are of supreme importance, and where
most products are subject to rigorous government regulation—
unlike potatoes, which vary widely in size, shape, and molecular
constitution, and generally do not require stringent product liability
insurance, multi-phase clinical trials, or FDA approval.
Still, it is likely that molecular manufacturing will eventually
allow reasonably inexpensive production of large batches of designed
medical nanorobots. As a very crude analogy, even in 1995 a typical
mail-order bioscience vendor2887 could manufacture 15 micromoles
(~9 x 1018 product items) of customized oligonucleotides for $18/
base up to at least 110 bases with a convenient 48-hour turnaround
on orders; other online vendors offer similar or slightly higher prices
up to 200-mer sequences with additional charges for necessary
purifications.2888 If a billion-base structure could be induced to
self-assemble (Section 2.3.1) from 10 million different sets of
100-mer custom-built oligonucleotides (total ~20 billion atoms),
forming a desired ~20-billion-atom nanomachine, then, optimistically
assuming a ~100% yield, the cost would be ~$2 x 10-9 per
nanomachine or ~$2000 per ~1 cm3 of product volume which would
include 1012 finished nanomachines. In 1998, many specialty
biotechnology-related drug treatments were comparably expensive.
For example, treatments for multiple sclerosis using two closely related
~22.5 kilodalton interferons were administered in dosages of ~1
milligram/week at a treatment cost of ~$10,000/yr,2950 which is
equivalent to a treatment cost of ~$2 x 10-9 (2 “nanodollars”) per
giga-atom. The famous HeLa (Henrietta Lacks) cell line2890 is an
example of a once tiny population of unique cancerous cells that
were purposely replicated in vitro (~24-hour replication time) over
many decades and are now widely available worldwide at very low
cost (e.g., $216 per 1-cm3 ampule of the ATCC CCL-2 HeLa cell
line2891). Swallowable therapeutic pills containing bacteria
Fig. 2.37. Multiple pathways lead to molecular manufacturing, the selfsupporting ability to design and build to atomic precision, which enables
nanomedicine.
Fig. 2.36. Estimated cost of 1 TeraFLOP (~1014 bits/sec) of peak
computing power (constant $1998 per TFLOP).
Basic Capabilities • Pathways to Molecular Manufacturing 69
(i.e., natural biological nanomachines) are already widely available
over the counter for gastrointestinal refloration, as for example
Salivarex™ which “contains a minimum of ~2.9 billion beneficial
bacteria per capsule”,3048 and Alkadophilus™ which “contains 1.5
billion organisms per capsule”,3049 both at a 1998 price of ~$0.2 x
10-9 per bacterium.
Another useful analogic approach to cost estimation is suggested
by the plunging price of computer power during the 20th century.
Figure 2.36 shows the cost, in constant 1998 U.S. dollars, of a
computer processing capability equivalent to ~1 TeraFLOP (1012
floating-point operations per second, ~1014 bits/sec assuming 64-bit
words). The plotted data is from a compilation of 67 historical
computers by Moravec1 through 1989, with an additional 27 data
points for other computers spanning 1973-1999 added by the author.
The chart shows that the cost of 1 TFLOP has fallen from $2 x 1020
in 1908 (the mechanical Hollerith Tabulator) to just $6 x 106 in
1998 (the SGI/Cray T3E-1200E), a 90-year price decline of almost 14
orders of magnitude—on average, a halving every ~2 years, a
century-long example of Moore’s Law. This trend may give us some
confidence that even if the first individual 1 micron3 nanorobot
costs ~$100,000 to assemble (much like the first Nippondenso
microcar; Section 2.2), eventually the unit price may fall at least 14
orders of magnitude to below ~$10-9 per nanorobot or <$1000 per
~1 cm3 dosage (1012 nanorobots). Recycling or remanufacturing
each nanomachine ~1000 times before final discard would then
imply a net ~$1/cm3 treatment cost. Of course, in 1998 all such
estimates were mere guesswork, but the ultimate expectation of
relatively low-cost nanomedical treatments was certainly rational, if
not provable.
This Chapter has demonstrated that there are many different
pathways leading toward molecular nanotechnology, each one of
which provides incremental benefits to motivate further travel down
the paths (Fig. 2.37). The likelihood of all the paths being blocked
is low, even if we have little confidence that we can predict which
approach will succeed first.8,9 Progress along the many pathways
will provide precursor products, including some early medical
applications, but the ultimate achievement of molecular manufacturing will finally make nanomedicine feasible.
As Drexler concluded Nanosystems:
10 “Each step along [these
pathways] will present great practical challenges, but each step will
also bring valuable new capabilities. The long-term rewards, measured
in terms of scientific and technological capabilities, appear large.” This
author agrees. For the remainder of the present work, we shall assume
that a molecular manufacturing technology will someday exist that can
economically manufacture macroscopic batches of microscopic machines
comprised of atomically-precise nanoscale components. The medical
applications and implications of such a technological capability are the
principle subject of this three-volume book.
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 3
Molecular Transport and Sortation
3.1 Human Body Chemical Composition
The human body consists of ~7 x 1027 atoms arranged in a
highly aperiodic physical structure. Although 41 chemical
elements are commonly found in the body’s construction
(Table 3.1), CHON comprises 99% of its atoms. Fully 87% of
human body atoms are either hydrogen or oxygen.
Somatic atoms are generally present in combined form as
molecules or ions, not individual atoms. The molecules of greatest
nanomedical interest are incorporated into cells or circulate freely
in blood plasma or the interstitial fluid. Table 3.2 summarizes the
gross molecular contents of the typical human cell, which is 99.5%
water and salts, by molecule count, and contains ~5000 different
types of molecules. Appendix B lists 261 of the most common
molecular and cellular constituents of human blood, and their normal
concentrations in whole blood and plasma. This listing is far from
complete. The human body is comprised of ~105 different molecular
species, mostly proteins—a large but nonetheless finite molecular
parts list. By 1998, at least ~104 of these proteins had been sequenced,
~103
 had been spatially mapped, and ~7,000 structures (including
proteins, peptides, viruses, protein/nucleic acid complexes, nucleic
acids, and carbohydrates) had been registered in the Protein Data
Bank which at that time was maintained at Brookhaven National
Laboratory.1144 Given the current accelerating pace of improving
technology,1145 it is likely that the sequences and 3-D or tertiary
structures of all human proteins will have been determined by the
second decade of the 21st century.
Transporting and sorting such a broad range of essential
molecular species will be an important basic capability of many
nanomedical systems. The three principal methods for distinguishing
and conveying molecules that are most useful in nanomedicine are
diffusion transport (Section 3.2), membrane filtration (Section 3.3),
and receptor-based transport (Section 3.4). The Chapter ends with
a brief discussion of binding site engineering (Section 3.5).
3.2 Diffusion Transport
Fluidic transfer of material, known as convective-diffusive transport,
can occur either by convection due to bulk flow or by diffusion due
to Brownian motion. In convective transport, material is carried
along fluid streamlines at the mean velocity of the fluid, with a
velocity distribution such as that in Poiseuille flow (Section 9.4.1.5).
Bulk flow is customarily regarded as the most important physiological
transport mechanism in the human circulation. Only for the smallest
molecules, such as water or glucose, does the time required to diffuse
across the width of a capillary roughly equal the time taken by a
fluid element to flow the same distance (~0.02 sec). Larger
molecules such as fibrinogen take ~100 times longer (~2 sec) to
diffuse across one capillary width.
However, bulk flow in the body is usually laminar. Transported
materials travel parallel to (and thus cannot reach) fluid/solid interfaces such as the surfaces of blood vessels or membranes. Wall interactions are made possible by diffusion, a random process in which
particles can move transversely to fluid streamlines in response to
molecular-scale collisions.
Additionally, the movement of micron-scale devices within a bulk
fluid flow is dominated by viscous, not inertial, forces (Section
Table 3.1 Estimated Atomic Composition of the Lean 70-kg
Male Human Body749,751,752,817
Element Sym # of Atoms Element Sym # of Atoms
Hydrogen H 4.22 x 1027 Cadmium Cd 3 x 1020
Oxygen O 1.61 x 1027 Boron B 2 x 1020
Carbon C 8.03 x 1026 Manganese Mn 1 x 1020
Nitrogen N 3.9 x 1025 Nickel Ni 1 x 1020
Calcium Ca 1.6 x 1025 Lithium Li 1 x 1020
Phosphorus P 9.6 x 1024 Barium Ba 8 x 1019
Sulfur S 2.6 x 1024 Iodine I 5 x 1019
Sodium Na 2.5 x 1024 Tin Sn 4 x 1019
Potassium K 2.2 x 1024 Gold Au 2 x 1019
Chlorine Cl 1.6 x 1024 Zirconium Zr 2 x 1019
Magnesium Mg 4.7 x 1023 Cobalt Co 2 x 1019
Silicon Si 3.9 x 1023 Cesium Cs 7 x 1018
Fluorine F 8.3 x 1022 Mercury Hg 6 x 1018
Iron Fe 4.5 x 1022 Arsenic As 6 x 1018
Zinc Zn 2.1 x 1022 Chromium Cr 6 x 1018
Rubidium Rb 2.2 x 1021 Molybdenum Mo 3 x 1018
Strontium Sr 2.2 x 1021 Selenium Se 3 x 1018
Bromine Br 2 x 1021 Beryllium Be 3 x 1018
Aluminum Al 1 x 1021 Vanadium V 8 x 1017
Copper Cu 7 x 1020 Uranium U 2 x 1017
Lead Pb 3 x 1020 Radium Ra 8 x 1010
Total: 6.71 x 1027
Table 3.2 Estimated Gross Molecular Contents of a Typical
20-µm Human Cell398,531,758-760,938
MW Number of
Molecule Mass % (daltons) # Molecules Molecule % Molecular Types
Water 65 18 1.74 x 1014 98.73 1
Other Inorganic 1.5 55 1.31 x 1012 0.74 20
Lipid 12 700 8.4 x 1011 0.475 50
Other Organic 0.4 250 7.7 x 1010 0.044 ~200
Protein 20 50,000 1.9 x 1010 0.011 ~5,000
RNA 1.0 1 x 106 5 x 107 3 x 10-5 –––
DNA 0.1 1 x 1011 46 3 x 10-11 –––
TOTALS 100% ––– 1.76 x 1014 100% –––
72 Nanomedicine • Volume I
9.4.2.1). Molecular transport to and from such nanodevices is
governed by diffusion, not by bulk flow.
3.2.1 Brownian Motion
A particle suspended in a fluid is subjected to continuous collisions,
from all directions, with the surrounding molecules. If the velocities of
all molecules were the same all the time, the particle would experience
no net movement. However, molecules do not have a single velocity
at a given temperature, but rather have a distribution of velocities
of varying degrees of probability. Thus from time to time, a suspended
particle receives a finite momentum of unpredictable direction and
magnitude. The velocity vector of the particle changes continuously,
resulting in an observable random zigzag movement called Brownian
motion.
Einstein385 approximated the RMS (root mean square) displacement
of a particle of radius R suspended in a fluid of absolute viscosity η
and temperature T, after an observation period τ, as:

∆ τ X (kT / 3 R) (meters) π η 1/2 = {Eqn. 3.1}
where k = 1.381 x 10-23 joule/kelvin (K) or 0.01381 zJ/K
(Boltzmann’s constant). Particles under bombardment also experience
a rotational Brownian motion around randomly oriented axes, with
the RMS angle of rotation:

∆α τ π η = (kT / 4 R ) (radians) 3 1/2 {Eqn. 3.2}
although for τ < τmin = M / 15 π η R, where M is particle mass (see
below), rotation is ballistic.
In human blood plasma, with η = 1.1 centipoise (1.1 x 10-3 kg/
m-sec) and T = 310 K, a spherical 1-micron diameter nanodevice
(R = 0.5 micron) translates ~1 micron in 1 sec (vbrownian ~ 10-6 m/sec)
or ~8 microns (~the width of a capillary) after 77 sec (vbrownian
~ 10-7 m/sec), and rotates once in ~16 sec (τmin = 2 x 10-8 sec). In
the same environment, a rigid 10-nm particle (roughly the diameter of
a globular protein) would translate ~8 microns in one second
(vbrownian ~ 10-5 m/sec) while rotating ~250 times, due to Brownian
motion (τmin = 2 x 10-12 sec).
The instantaneous thermal velocity over one mean free path, the
average distance between collisions, is much higher than the net
Brownian translational velocity would suggest. For a particle of mass
M = 4/3 π ρ R3 with mean (working) density ρ, the mean thermal
velocity is:
vthermal = (3 kT / M)1/2 {Eqn. 3.3}
At T = 310 K, a spherical 1-micron diameter nanodevice of normal
density (e.g., taking ρ ~ ρH2O = 993.4 kg/m3 to minimize ballasting
requirements; Section 10.3.6) has vthermal ~ 5 x 10-3 m/sec; for a spherical 10-nm diameter protein with ρ ~ 1500 kg/m3
, vthermal ~ 4 m/sec.
3.2.2 Passive Diffusive Intake
Medical nanodevices will frequently be called upon to absorb
some particular material from the external aqueous operating
environment. Molecular diffusion presents a fundamental limit to
the speed at which this absorption can occur. (Once a block of solution
has passed into the interior of a nanodevice, it may be divergently
subdivided and transported at ~0.01-1 m/sec along internal pathways
of characteristic dimension ~1 micron far faster than the <1 mm/
sec bulk diffusion velocity across 1 micron distances; Section 9.2.7.5.)
For a spherical nanodevice of radius R, the maximum diffusive
intake current is:
J = 4 π R D C {Eqn. 3.4}
where J is the number of molecules/sec presented to the entire surface
of the device, assumed to be 100% absorbed (but see Section 4.2.5),
D (m2
/sec) is the translational Brownian diffusion coefficient for
the molecule to be absorbed, and C (molecules/m3
) is the steady-state
concentration of the molecule far from the device.337 (Blood concentrations in gm/cm3 from Appendix B are converted to molecules/
m3 by multiplying Appendix B figures by (106 x NA/MW), where
NA = 6.023 x 1023 molecules/mole (Avogadro’s number) and MW
= molecular weight in gm/mole or daltons.) For rigid spherical
particles of radius R, where R >> RH2O, the Einstein-Stokes equation363
gives:
D = kT / (6 π η R) {Eqn. 3.5}
though this is only an approximation because D varies slightly with
concentration, with departure from molecular sphericalness, and
other factors.
Measured diffusion coefficients in water for various molecules
of physiological interest, converted to 310 K, are in Table 3.3.
Diffusion coefficient data for ionic salts such as NaCl and KCl,
which dissociate in water and diffuse as independent ions, are for
solvated electrolytes. A 1-micron (diameter) spherical nanodevice
suspended in arterial blood plasma at 310 K, with C = 7.3 x 1022
molecules/m3 of oxygen and D = 2.0 x 10-9 m2
/sec, encounters a
flow rate of J = 9.2 x 108 molecules/sec of O2 impinging upon its
surface. (The same calculation applied to serum glucose yields
J = 1.3 x 1010 molecules/sec.) The characteristic time for change
mediated by diffusion in a region of size L scales as ~L2
/D (Eqn. 3.9,
below). Across the diameter of an L = 1 micron nanodevice, small
molecules such as glucose diffuse in ~0.001 sec, small proteins like
hemoglobin in ~0.01 sec, and virus particles diffuse in ~0.1 sec.
Diffusion coefficients of the same molecules in air at room
temperature are a factor of ~60 higher, because ηair ~ 183 micropoise
at 20˚C.
In blood, the diffusivity of larger particles is significantly elevated
because local fluid motions generated by individual red cell rotation
lead to greater random excursions of the particles.388 The effective
diffusivity De = D + Dr, where the rotation-induced increase in
diffusivity Dr ~ 0.25 Rrbc2 g, with red cell radius Rrbc ~ 2.8 microns
(taken for convenience as a spherical volume equivalent) and a typical
blood shear rate (Section 9.4.1.1) g ~ 500 sec-1, giving Dr ~10-9 m2
/sec
in normal whole blood. The elevation of diffusivity caused by red
cell stirring is just 50% for O2 molecules. However, for large proteins
and viruses the effective diffusivity increases 10-100 times, and the
effective diffusivity of particles the size of platelets is a factor of 10,000
higher than for Brownian molecular diffusion.
The diffusion current to the surface of a nanodevice can also be
estimated for various nonspherical configurations.337 For instance,
the diffusion current to both sides of an isolated thin disk of radius
R is given by J = 8 R D C. The two-sided current to a square thin
plate of area L2 is J = (8/π1/2) L D C. The steady-state diffusion current
to an isolated cylinder of length Lc and radius R is approximated by
J = 2 π Lc DC / (ln (2Lc/R) - 1 ), for Lc >> R. The diffusion current
through a circular hole of radius R in an impermeable wall separating
regions of concentration c1 and c2 is J = 4 R D (c1-c2).
3.2.3 Active Diffusive Intake
Foraging nanodevices operating in aqueous environments may
only modestly exceed the maximum rates of passive diffusive intake
described in Section 3.2.2 by engaging in active physical movements
designed to increase access to the desired molecules, as described
quantitatively below.
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 73
3.2.3.1 Diffusive Stirring
The first strategy for active diffusive intake is local stirring. For
this, the nanodevice is equipped with suitable active appendages
used to manipulate the fluid in its vicinity. Transport by stirring is
characterized by a velocity va, the speed of the appendage, and by a
length La, its distance of travel, which together define a characteristic
stirring frequency νstir ~ va/La sec-1. Movement of molecules over a
distance La by diffusion alone is scaled by a characteristic time ~La
2
/D
(Section 3.2.2), which defines a characteristic diffusion frequency
νdiff ~ D / La
2 sec-1. Stirring will be more effective than diffusion
only if νstir > νdiff, that is, if va > D / La. For local stirring, La cannot be
much larger than the size of the nanodevice itself. Assuming La = 1
micron and D = 10-9 m2
/sec for small molecules, then va > 1000
microns/sec, a faster motion than is exhibited by bacterial cells but
quite modest for nanomechanical devices (Section 9.3.1). With
D=10-11 m2
/sec for large proteins and virus particles, va > 10
microns/sec, well within the normal microbiological range.
The ratio of stirring time to diffusion time, or Sherwood number,
is:
NSh = La va / D {Eqn. 3.6}
provides a dimensionless measure of the effectiveness of stirring vs.
diffusion. For bacteria absorbing small molecules, NSh ~ 10-2.
Micron-scale nanodevices with 1-micron appendages capable of
0.01-1 m/sec movement can achieve NSh ~ 10-1000 for small to
large molecules, hence could be considerably more effective stirrers.
In a classic paper, Berg and Purcell337 analyzed the viscous
frictional energy cost of moving the stirring appendages so that the
fluid surrounding a spherical object (e.g., a nanodevice) of radius
R, out to some maximum stirring radius Rs, is maintained approximately uniform in concentration. The objective is to transfer fluid
from a distant region of relatively high concentration to a place
much closer to the nanodevice, thereby increasing the concentration
gradient near the absorbing surface. To double the passive diffusion
current by stirring, the minimum required power density is:

P 12 D
R
R 2R
R 2R (watts/m ) d
2
4
s
s
3
3 ≈ +
−


 

 η {Eqn. 3.7}
If η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec, R = 0.5 micron, D = 10-9 m2
/sec for
small molecules, and using a modest La = 1 micron stirring apparatus
giving Rs = 3R, then Pd ~ 3 x 107 watts/m3
. This greatly exceeds the
102
-106 watts/m3 power density commonly available to biological
cells (Table 6.8) but lies well within the normal range for
nanomechanical systems which typically operate at up to ~109
watts/m3
. (Nanomedically safe in vivo power densities are discussed
at length in Sections 6.5.2 and 6.5.3.) For D ~ 10-11 m2
/sec for
large molecules, Pd ~ 3 x 103 watts/m3
, which is reasonable even by
biological standards. The maximum possible gain from stirring is
~Rs/R, because the current is ultimately limited to what can diffuse
into the stirred region.
Local heating due to stirring is minor. Given device volume V
~1 micron3
, Pd = 3 x 107
 watts/m3
, mixing distance Lmix ~ 5 microns,
and thermal conductivity Kt = 0.623 watts/m-K for water, then ∆T
~ (Pd V / Lmix Kt) = 10 microkelvins; taking heat capacity CV = 4.19
x 106 J/m3
-K for water, thermal equilibration time tEQ ~ Lmix2
 CV /
Kt = 0.2 millisec.
3.2.3.2 Diffusive Swimming
The second strategy for active diffusive intake is by swimming.
Again, the nanodevice is equipped with suitable active propulsion
equipment (Section 9.4) which enables it to move so as to continuously encounter the highest possible concentration gradient
near its surface. Consider a spherical motile nanorobot of radius
R propelled at constant velocity vswim through a fluid containing a
desired molecule for which the surface of the device is essentially a
perfect sink (Section 4.2.5). Applying the Stokes velocity field flow
around the sphere to the standard diffusion equation, a numerical
solution by Berg and Purcell337 found that the fractional increase in
the diffusion current due to swimming is proportional to vswim2 for
vswim<< D/R, and to vswim
1/3 for vswim >> D/R.
Table 3.3 Translational Brownian Diffusion Coefficients for
Physiologically Important Molecules Suspended
in Water at 310 K (most values converted from
measured data at 20 ˚C).390,754,761-763
Mol. Wt. Diff. Coeff.
Diffusing Particle in Water (gm/mole) D (m2/sec)
H2 2 5.4 x 10-9
H2O 18 2.31 x 10-9
O2 32 2.0 x 10-9
Methanol 32 1.5 x 10-9
HCl 36.5 3.6 x 10-9
CO2 44 1.9 x 10-9
NaCl 58.5 1.5 x 10-9
Urea 60 1.3 x 10-9
Glycine 75 1.0 x 10-9
KCl 75 2.0 x 10-9
α-Alanine isomer 89 9.5 x 10-10
β-Alanine isomer 89 9.7 x 10-10
Glycerol 92 8.8 x 10-10
CaCl2 111 1.2 x 10-9
Glucose 180 7.1 x 10-10
Mannitol 182 7.1 x 10-10
Citric acid 192 6.9 x 10-10
Sucrose 342 5.4 x 10-10
Milk lipase 6,669 1.5 x 10-10
Ribonuclease 13,683 1.3 x 10-10
Insulin 24,430 7.7 x 10-11
Scarlet fever toxin 27,000 1.0 x 10-10
Somatotropin 27,100 9.4 x 10-11
Carbonic anhydrase Y 30,640 1.1 x 10-10
Plasma mucoprotein 44,070 5.6 x 10-11
Ovalbumin 43,500 8.1 x 10-11
Hemoglobin 68,000 7.3 x 10-11
Serum albumin 68,460 6.5 x 10-11
Transferrin 74,000 6.2 x 10-11
Gonadotropin 98,630 4.7 x 10-11
Collagenase 109,000 4.5 x 10-11
Actin 130,000 5.3 x 10-11
Plasminogen (profibrolysin) 143,000 3.1 x 10-11
Ceruloplasmin 143,300 5.0 x 10-11
γ-Globulin 153,100 4.2 x 10-11
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) 158.500 4.2 x 10-11
Hyaluronic acid 177,100 1.3 x 10-11
Glucose dehydrogenase 190,000 3.6 x 10-11
Fibrinogen 339,700 2.1 x 10-11
Collagen 345,000 7.3 x 10-12
Urease 482,700 3.7 x 10-11
Cytochrome a 529,800 3.8 x 10-11
α-Macroglobulin 820,000 2.5 x 10-11
β-Lipoprotein 2,663,000 1.8 x 10-11
Ribosome 4,200,000 1.3 x 10-11
Viral DNA 6,000,000 1.4 x 10-12
Urinary mucoprotein 7,000,000 3.4 x 10-12
Tobacco mosaic virus 31,340,000 5.6 x 10-12
T7 Bacteriophage 37,500,000 9.5 x 10-12
Polyhedral silkworm virus 916,200,000 2.3 x 10-12
1-µm spherical nanodevice ~8 x 1011 4.1 x 10-13
Platelet (~2.4 µm) ~4 x 1012 1.6 x 10-13
Red Blood Cell (~5.6 microns) ~6 x 1013 6.8 x 10-14
74 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Diffusive intake is doubled at a swimming speed vswim = 2.5 D/R,
which for 1-micron devices is ~5000 microns/sec when absorbing
small molecules, ~50 microns/sec for large molecules. The viscous
frictional energy cost to drive the nanodevice through the fluid,
derived from Stokes’ law (Eqn. 9.73), requires an onboard power
density of:

P 9 v d swim / 2 R 2 2 = η {Eqn. 3.8}
If η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec, vswim = 2.5 D/R, R = 0.5 micron,
D = 10-9 m2
/sec for small molecules, then Pd ~ 5 x 105 watts/m3
.
For large molecules with D = 10-11 m2
/sec, Pd ~ 50 watts/m3
. Thus
the energy cost of diffusive swimming appears modest for
nanomechanical systems; gains in diffusion by swimming for
nanodevices will be restricted primarily by the maximum safe
velocity that may be employed in vivo (Section 9.4.2.6).
In general, outswimming diffusion requires movement over a
characteristic distance Ls ~ D/vswim.
389 For bacteria moving at ~30
micron/sec and absorbing small molecules, then Ls ~ 30 microns,
roughly the sprint distance exhibited by flagellar microbes such as
E. coli. For micron-scale nanodevices moving at ~1 cm/sec (Section
9.4), Ls ~ 1-100 nm for large to small molecules.
3.2.4 Diffusion Cascade Sortation
Nanodevices may also use diffusion to sort molecules. One of
the remarkable features of diffusive sortation is that an input sample
consisting of a complex mixture of many different molecular species
can sometimes be completely resolved into pure fractions without
having any direct knowledge of the precise shapes or electrochemical
characteristics of the molecules being sorted. This can be a tremendous
advantage for nanodevices operating in environments containing a
large number of unknown substances. Another major advantage is
the ability to readily distinguish isomeric (though not chiral)
molecules. As one example of many possible, molecules suspended
in water will diffuse into an adjacent region of pure water at different
speeds, giving rise to dissimilar time-dependent concentration
gradients which may be exploited for sortation by interrupting the
process before complete diffusive equilibrium is reached.
For simplicity, assume we wish to separate two molecular species
initially present in solution in equal concentrations (c1 = c2), but
having unequal diffusion coefficients (D1 < D2). Consider a separation
apparatus with two chambers. Chamber A contains input sample
concentrate. Chamber B contains pure water. A dilating gate
(Section 3.3.2) separates the two chambers. The gate is opened for
a time ∆t approximated by:

∆ ∆
t
( X)
2 D ~ L
2 D
2
2
2
2
= {Eqn. 3.9}
which relates the diffusion coefficient to the mean displacement
∆X, taken here as L, the length of Chamber B. Table 3.4 gives an
estimate of the time required for diffusion to reach 90% completion
for glycine, a typical small molecule, in aqueous solution.
After ∆t has elapsed, the gate is closed. (A gate with 10-nm sliding
segments moving at 10 cm/sec closes in 0.1 microsec.) The
faster-diffusing component D2 approaches diffusive equilibrium in
Chamber B, but the slower-diffusing component does not; it is
present only in smaller amounts. This gives a separation factor c2/c1
~ D2/D1 for each diffusion sortation unit. If n units are connected
in series, with each unit receiving as input the output of the previous
unit, the net concentration achieved by the entire cascade is
~(D2/D1)
n
. Such cascades are commonplace in gaseous diffusion
isotope separation875 and other applications.
Figure 3.1 shows a 2-dimensional representation of an efficient
design for a simple diffusion unit that might be used in a sortation
cascade. Each unit consists of 5 chambers of equal volume, 7
dilating gates, 3 flap valves, 3 pistons, and 2 sieves which pass only
water (or smaller) molecules. Each chamber is roughly cubical with
L ~ 35 nm along the inside edge; including full piston throws and
drives, controls, interunit piping and other support structures, each
unit measures ~125 nm x 100 nm x 80 nm or ~0.001 micron3 with
a mass of ~10-18 kg.
The following is a precise description of one complete cycle of
operation for each unit:
1. The cycle begins with fluid to be sorted in Chamber A, Chambers
B and W full of pure water with piston W all the way out,
Chambers R and D empty with pistons R and D all the way in,
and all valves and gates closed.
2. Gate AB is opened for a time ∆t, then closed. For a small
molecule such as urea (MW = 60 daltons), ∆t= 1 microsec; for
a large molecule such as the enzyme urease (MW = 482,700
daltons), ∆t= 35 microsec.
3. Valves AI- and AI+, and gate AR, are opened. Piston R is drawn
fully out, slowly to preserve laminar flow and to prevent mixing.
Fluid in Chamber A is drawn into Chamber R. Fluid passing
through the DO gate of the previous unit in the cascade enters
Chamber A through valve AI-. Fluid passing through the RO
valve of the subsequent unit in the cascade enters Chamber A
through valve AI+. All valves and gates are closed. Chamber A is
now ready for the next cycle.
4. Gates WB and BD are opened. Piston W is slowly pushed all
the way in while piston D is slowly pulled all the way out.
Concentrated solution in Chamber B is transferred into
Chamber D as pure water in Chamber W is transferred into
Chamber B, again preserving laminar flow. Both gates are closed;
Chamber B is now ready for the next cycle.
5. Gates RW and DW are opened. Pistons R and D are slowly and
simultaneously pushed halfway in while piston W is pulled all
the way out. Forced at high pressure (~160 atm) through ~0.3 nm
diameter sieve pores (Section 3.3.1), half of the solvent water
present in Chambers R and D is pushed into Chamber W, filling
Chamber W with water. (This design allows for easy backflushing
if sieve pores become clogged.) Both gates are closed; Chamber
W is now ready for the next cycle.
Table 3.4 Estimated Time for Diffusion to Reach 90%
Completion for Glycine in Aqueous Solution
at 310 K.397
Diffusion Distance Diffusion Time (sec) Mean Velocity
1 nm 10-9 1 m/sec
10 nm 10-7 100 mm/sec
100 nm 10-5 10 mm/sec
1 micron 10-3 1 mm/sec
10 microns 10-1 100 micron/sec
100 microns 10 10 micron/sec
1 mm 1000 (17 min) 1 micron/sec
1 cm 105
 (28 hr) 0.1 micron/sec
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 75
6. Valve RO and gate DO are opened. Pistons R and D are slowly
and simultaneously pushed the rest of the way in. Concentrated
return fluid passes through valve RO and back to the AI+ input
port of the previous unit in the cascade for further extraction.
Concentrated diffusant fluid passes through gate DO and on to
the AI- input port of the subsequent unit in the cascade for
further purification. The valve and gate are closed; Chambers R
and D are now empty and ready for the next cycle.
7. Return to Step (1). Adjacent units operate in counterphase while
previous and subsequent units operate in synchrony, in a
two-phase system.
Increasingly purified sample passes through a multi-unit sortation
cascade as described above. For small molecules, a cascade of n ~1000
units (total device volume ~1 micron3
) completely resolves two mixed
molecular species with D2/D1 = 1.01. As a crude approximation,
D ~ 1 / MW1/3 for small spherical particles,390 so this cascade separates
small molecules differing by the mass of one hydrogen atom which
should be sufficient for most purposes. Structural isomeric forms of
the same molecule, such as α-alanine and β-alanine, often have
slightly different diffusion coefficients, thus are also easily
separable using a diffusion cascade. However, stereoisomeric (chiral)
forms cannot be sorted by diffusion through an optically inactive
solvent like water.
For large molecules, a 1 million-unit cascade (total device volume
~1000 micron3
) provides D2/D1 ~ 1.00001, sufficient to completely
separate large molecules differing by the mass of a single carbon
atom. The fidelity of such fine resolutions depends strongly upon
the ability to hold constant the temperature of the chamber, since
D varies directly with temperature (Eqn. 3.5). Device temperature
stability will be determined by at least three factors: (1) the accuracy of
onboard thermal sensors in measuring T (∆T/T < 10-6
;
Section 4.6.1), (2) the rapidity with which the temperature
measurement can be taken (10-9 to 10-6 sec; Section 4.6.1), and (3)
the time that elapses between the temperature measurement and
the end of the diffusive sortation process (which may be of the same
order as the gate closing time, ~10-6 sec).
Most of the waste heat is generated in this device by forced
water sieving (Section 3.3.1). To remain within biocompatible
thermogenic limits (~109
 watts/m3
), each unit may be cycled once
every ~3 millisec, a 0.8% duty cycle of a ~23 microsec sieving stroke.
Subject to this restriction, each unit would consume ~1 picowatt in
continuous operation. A unit presented with a ~0.1 M concentration of small molecules processes ~106 molecules/sec (e.g., ~1 gm/
hour of glucose using 1 cm3 of n = 1000-unit cascades), or ~104
molecules/sec for a unit presented with large molecules at ~0.001
M, circulating ~109 molecules/sec of water as working fluid while
running at 340 cycles/sec. Additional chamber segments on each
unit, combined with more complex diffusion circuits among the
many units in a cascade, should permit the simultaneous complete
fractionation of the input feedstock even if hundreds of distinct
molecular species are present.
By 1998, diffusion-based separation had been demonstrated in
microfluidic devices.2689
Fig. 3.1. Schematic of diffusion cascade sortation unit.
76 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Fig. 3.2.Schematic of teragravity nanocentrifuge.
3.2.5 Nanocentrifugal Sortation
Nanoscale centrifuges offer yet another method for rapid
molecular sortation, by biasing diffusive forces with a strong external
field. The well-known effect of gravitational acceleration on spherical
particles suspended in a fluid is described by Stokes’ Law for
Sedimentation:
vt = 2 g R2
 (ρparticle - ρfluid) / 9 η {Eqn. 3.10}
where vt is terminal velocity, g is the acceleration of gravity
(9.81 m/sec2
), R is particle radius, ρparticle and ρfluid are the particle
and fluid densities (kg/m3
), and η is coefficient of viscosity of the
fluid. Particles which are more dense than the suspending liquid
tend to fall. Those which are less dense tend to rise (ρparticle / ρfluid
~0.8 for lipids, up to ~1.5 for proteins, and ~1.6 for carbohydrates
in water).
This separation process may be greatly enhanced by rapidly spinning the mixed-molecule sample in a nanocentrifuge device. For
ideal solutions (e.g., obeying Raoult’s law) at equilibrium:390

c /c exp 2 R T 1 rr 2 1 g
fluid
particle 2
2
1
2 = 




 − 




 ( ) −








MWkg ω ρ
ρ
2
{Eqn. 3.11}
where c2 is the concentration at distance r2 from the axis of a spinning
centrifuge (molecules/m3
), c1 is the concentration at distance r1
(nearer the axis), MWkg is the molecular weight of the desired
molecule in kg/mole, ω is the angular velocity of the vessel (rad/
sec), T is temperature (K) and the universal gas constant Rg = 8.31
joule/mole-K. The approximate spinning time t required to reach
equilibrium is
ts = ln(r2/r1) / (ω2
 Sd) {Eqn. 3.12}
where Sd is the sedimentation coefficient, usually given in units of
10-13 sec or svedbergs (Table 3.5). Research ultracentrifuges have
reached accelerations of ~109 g’s.
Consider a cylindrical diamondoid vessel of density ρvessel = 3510
kg/m3
, radius rc = 200 nm, height h = 100 nm, and wall thickness
xwall = 10 nm, securely attached to an axial drive shaft of radius ra =
50 nm (schematic in Fig. 3.2). A fluid sample containing desired
molecules enters the vessel through a hollow conduit in the drive
shaft, and the device is rapidly spun. If rim speed vr = 1000 m/sec
(max), then ω = vr / rc = 5 x 109 rad/sec (ω / 2 π = 8 x 108 rev/sec).
The maximum bursting force Fb ~ 0.5 ρvessel vr
2 = 2 x 109 N/m2
,
well below the 50 x 109 N/m2 diamondoid tensile strength conservatively assumed by Drexler.10 Since Sd ranges from 0.1-200 x 10-13
sec for most particles of nanomedical interest (Table 3.5), minimum
separation time using acceleration ar / g = vr
2 / g rc = 5 x 1011 g’s,
when r2 = rc and r1 = ra, is ts = 0.003-6.0 x 10-6 sec. Fluid sample
components migrate at ~0.1 m/sec.
Maximum centrifugation energy per particle Ec = (MWkg / NA)
ar (rc - ra) ~ 10,000 zJ/molecule, or ~10 zJ/bond for proteins, well
below the 180-1800 zJ/bond range for covalent chemical bonds
(Section 3.5.1). However, operating the nanocentrifuge at peak speed
may disrupt the weakest noncovalent bonds (including hydrophobic,
hydrogen, and van der Waals) which range from 4-50 zJ/bond. The
nanocentrifuge has mass ~10-17 kg, requires ~3 picojoules to spin
up to speed (bearing drag consumes ~10 nanowatts of power, and
fluid drag through the internal plumbing contributes another ~5
nanowatts), completes each separation cycle in ~104 revs (~10-5 sec),
and processes ~300 micron3
/sec which is ~1013 small molecules/sec
(at 1% input concentration) or ~109 large molecules/sec (at 0.1%
input concentration).
From Eqn. 3.11, the nanocentrifuge separates salt from seawater
with c2/c1 ~ 300 across the width of the vessel (rc - ra = 150 nm);
extracting glucose from water at 310 K, c2/c1 ~105 over 150 nm.
For proteins with ρparticle ~ 1500 kg/m3
, separation product removal
ports may be spaced, say, 10 nm apart along the vessel radius while
maintaining c2/c1 ~ 103 between each port. Vacuum isolation of the
unit in an isothermal environment and operation in continuous-flow
mode could permit exchange of contents while the vessel is still
moving, sharply reducing remixing, vibrations, and thermal
convection currents between product layers. A complete design
specification of product removal ports, batch and continuous flow
protocols, compression profiles, etc. is beyond the scope of this book.
Variable gradient density centrifugation may be used to trap
molecules of a specific density in a specific zone for subsequent
harvesting, allowing recovery of each molecular species from complex
mixtures of substances that are close in density. The traditional
method is a series of stratified layers of sucrose or cesium chloride
solutions that increase in density from the top to the bottom of the
tube. A continuous density gradient may also be used, with the
Table 3.5 Sedimentation Coefficients for Particles in
Aqueous Suspension at 310 K (1 svedberg = 10-13
sec; values converted from measured data at
20˚C)390,754
Particle Sed. Coeff. (sec) Mol. Wt.
O2 0.12 x 10-13 32
CO2 0.07 x 10-13 44
Glucose 0.18 x 10-13 180
Insulin monomer 1.5 x 10-13 6,000
Ribonuclease 1.75 x 10-13 13,683
Lysozyme 2.03 x 10-13 17,200
Insulin 1.84 x 10-13 24,430
Ovalbumin 3.4 x 10-13 43,500
Serum albumin 4.3 x 10-13 68,460
Alcohol dehydrogenase 7.2 x 10-13 150,000
Catalase 10.7 x 10-13 250,000
β-Lipoprotein 5.6 x 10-13 2,663,000
Actomycin 11.3 x 10-13 3,900,000
TMV 175 x 10-13 31,340,000
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 77
density of the suspension fluid calibrated by physical compression. For example, the coefficient of isothermal compressibility
κ = -(∆Vl/Vl ) / ∆Pl = (∆ρfluid / ρfluid) / ∆Pl = 4.492 x 10-5 atm-1 for
water at 1 atm and 310 K (compressibility is pressure- and
temperature-dependent). Applying Pl = 12,000 atm to the vessel
raises fluid density to 1250 kg/m3
,
567 sufficient to partially regulate
protein zoning. A multistage cascade (Section 3.2.4) may be necessary
for complete compositional separation. Protein denaturation
between 5000-15,000 atm585 due to hydrogen bond disruption may
limit nanocentrifugation rotational velocity. Protein compressibility may
further reduce separability. The balance between the differential
densities and the differential compressibilities will determine the
equilibrium radius of the protein in the centrifuge; in the limiting
case of equal compressibilities for a given target protein and water,
there is no stable equilibrium radius.
The nanocentrifuge may also be useful in isotopic separations.
For a D2O/H2O mixture, c2/c1 = 1.415 per pass through the
device; c2/c1 = 106 is achieved in a 40-unit cascade. Tracer glycine
containing one atom of C14 is separated from natural glycine using
a 113-unit cascade, achieving c2/c1 = 106
.
3.3 Membrane Filtration
Filtration through a permeable membrane is closely related to
the process of diffusion, since in both cases random molecular motions
help carry the process to completion. However, the presence of a
membrane adds a new measure of control that is not exploited in
simple diffusive transport. This control may be either passive or
active, unidirectional or bidirectional, as described below.
3.3.1 Simple Nanosieving
Nanometer-scale isoporous molecular sieves (with ovoid, square,
or hexagonal holes) are common in almost every taxonomic group
of eubacteria and archaeobacteria.525 Other well-known examples
of nanoporous structures are the 6-nm pore arrays found in reverse
osmosis and kidney dialysis membranes.
Likewise, it is possible for a nanodevice to sort molecules by
simple sieving.987,1177 In this process, a sample containing particles
of various sizes suspended in water passes through a graduated series of
filters perforated by progressively smaller holes of fixed size and shape.
Between each filtration unit, the filtration residue consists almost
exclusively of particles having a narrow range of sizes and shapes.
For example, a series of n = 100 filtration units could reliably
differentiate an input sample containing particles from 0.2-1.2 nm
into 100 separate fractions, each fraction consisting predominantly
of particles differing in mean diameter by ~0.01 nm. (In a practical
system, several passes would be required to achieve complete
discrimination; Section 3.2.4.) A ~0.01 nm difference in molecular
diameter corresponds to the mean contribution of ~1 additional
carbon atom to the size of a small molecule (MW ~ 100 daltons), or
to the mean contribution of ~100 additional carbon atoms to the
size of a large molecule (MW ~ 100,000 daltons, ~17,000 atoms).
A nanomembrane might even permit the (slow, multi-pass) sieving
of oxygen from air, since the molecular diameters of N2 and O2
differ by ~0.01 nm (Section 3.5.5).
Two opposing forces are at work when moving water and solutes
through a membrane. One is the osmotic pressure established by
the presence of nonpermeating solutes; the other is the hydraulic or
fluid pressure. The velocity of material movement depends on the
relative values of the osmotic and hydraulic forces, and on the size
of the pores in the filter.
Osmotic pressure pπ is given by the Donnan-van’t Hoff
formula:403

p
R T (c c )
MW 1 Z (c c )
c (N/m ) g 21
kg
2
2 1
s
2
π =  −




 +  −





{Eqn. 3.13}
where Rg = 8.31 joules/mole-K, T is temperature in kelvins (K), c2
and c1 are solute concentrations on either side of the membrane in
kg/m3
 (c2 > c1), MWkg is the molecular weight of the solute in kg/
mole, and the Z2 term (dependent upon polymer-polymer interactions)
is a correction factor for highly concentrated solutions which for
some solvents and temperatures may equal zero; Z = net solute charge
number and cs is the concentration in kg/m3
 of a second solute, as
for example when the first solute is a protein and the second solute
is salt, as in human serum. Water at 310 K dissolves a maximum of
c2 = 370 kg/m3
 of sodium chloride (a 37.0% solution, by weight),
and MWkg = 0.05844 kg/mole for NaCl, so for salt water solutions
the theoretical maximum pπ ~ 1.6 x 107 N/m2 ~ 160 atm. Natural
bloodstream concentrations of salt produce pπ ~ 3 atm. Since
osmotic pressure depends on the number of molecules present, the
contribution from large molecules is usually negligible. For instance,
total protein concentration in human blood serum is c2 ~ 73 kg/m3
,
MWkg ~ 50 kg/mole (~50,000 daltons), so pπ ~ 0.04 atm.
In theory, extremely large hydraulic counterforces up to 105 atm
may be applied in nanomechanical systems, for example by a piston, to
overcome osmotic backpressure. As a practical matter, however,
rapidly pushing small molecules at high pressure through nanoscale
holes is an effective method for generating significant amounts of
waste heat; a design compromise is required.
Consider a simple sorting apparatus in which a square piston is
used to compress solvent fluid (say, water) trapped in a chamber
hchamber in length and Lchamber2 in cross-sectional area, forcing the
fluid to filter through pores of radius rpore (~ target molecule radius)
covering a fraction αH (~50%) of the surface of a square nanoscale
sieve of thickness hsieve and area Lsieve2
. Solute which is dissolved or
suspended in the solvent is sorted based on molecular size; a sequence
of sieving runs using sieves having progressively smaller pore radii
produces an ordered sequence of molecular size fractions. (In small
molecules, adding the mass of one hydrogen atom increases the me
n linear dimension of the molecule by 0.1-1%.)
The first design constraint on this system relates to its maximum
operating pressure. If ∆P is applied pressure (N/m2
), then avoiding
boiling the solvent water and denaturing proteins requires at least
that ∆Pmax < CV ∆Tboil, where the heat capacity of water CV = 4.19
x 106 joules/m3
-K and ∆Tboil = 373 K - 310 K = 63 K give ∆Pmax <
2600 atm. The designs presented below operate at 6% of this
maximum (∆T ~ 3 K) or less.
There are two major design constraints on the duration of the
power stroke, or tp:
1. Molecular Rotation Constraint — Flow through the sieve must
be slow enough to allow molecules to align with the holes.
Assuming round pores, the total number of pores in the sieve is
Npore = αH Lsieve2 / π r2
. The volume processing rate (m3
/sec) of the
sieve Vsieve = Vchamber = hchamber Lchamber2
/tp, hence the molecule processing rate is N = Vchamber ctarget (molecules/sec) where ctarget is the
concentration of target molecules (molecules/m3
). At any one time,
each pore channel through the sieve can hold at most Nchannel =
hsieve / 2 rpore molecules in single file; during each power stroke, at
most Nstack = N tp / Npore molecules pass through each pore. Hence
the time available for molecular rotation trot = tp (Nchannel / Nstack),
which assumes the layer of rotating target molecules in the vicinity
of the pores approximates sieve thickness hsieve, a reasonable
assumption as long as the typical molecular diffusion time (across
78 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Fig. 3.3. Variable size/shape apertures using two nanoscale perforated
sliding plates.
a distance hsieve) << trot. Taking Nrot ~ 10 as the mean number of
molecular revolutions needed to ensure proper pore alignment
with noncircular sieve holes (the most difficult case), then, from
Eqn. 3.2, ∆α = (kT trot / 4 π η rpore
3
)
1/2  2 π Nrot, where η is
solvent viscosity (1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec for plasma) at T = 310 K.
Solving for minimum tp gives:

t
32 N c h r
kT h (sec) p
4
rot
2
target chamber pore
6
H sieve
≥ π η
α
{Eqn. 3.14}
2. Pressure/Flow Constraint — Flow through the sieve must be
fast enough to establish a sufficient pressure to oppose osmotic
backflows. From the Hagen-Poiseuille law (Section 9.2.5), the volume
processing rate through each pore is Vpore = π rpore
4 ∆Psieve / 8 η
hsieve and the volume processing rate through the entire sieve is Vsieve
= Npore Vpore = Vchamber; solving for maximum tp gives:

t
8 h h L
P r L
(sec) p chamber sieve chamber
2
H sieve pore
2
sieve
2 ≤ η
α ∆
{Eqn. 3.15}
Equating these two bracketing constraints, hsieve ≥ 150 nm for large
molecules (rpore ~5 nm) but hsieve ≥ 1 nm for small molecules (rpore ~
0.32 nm).
As a final constraint, power released by fluid flow through the
chamber and sieve must not exceed safe thermogenic limits. Given
the maximum safe power density for in vivo nanomachines given in
Section 6.5.3 as Dn=109
 watts/m3
, then:

D P
(h h ) L
D (watts/m ) device
device
chamber sieve chamber
2 n
3 = + ≤
{Eqn. 3.16}
where Ddevice = device power density (watts/m3
), total device power
Pdevice = Pchamber + Psieve (watts), chamber fluid flow power Pchamber =
π Lsieve
4 ∆Pchamber2 / 128 hchamber η, sieve fluid flow power Psieve =
αH Lsieve2
 rpore2 ∆Psieve2 / 8 hsieve η, and ∆Pchamber = 16 αH hchamber
rpore2 ∆Psieve / π Lsieve2
 hsieve. For small molecules such as NaCl or
glucose, ∆Psieve ≥ 160 atm to overcome maximum osmotic
backpressure; for large molecules (e.g., ~50,000 dalton proteins),
we assume ∆Psieve ≥ 1 atm to ensure sieving. The following designs
are not optimized but illustrate the tradeoffs involved.
For small molecules (rpore ~ 0.32 nm), an exemplar ~1 micron3
device has hchamber = 1 micron, Lchamber = Lsieve = 0.6 micron, hsieve =
1.5 microns, tp = 0.016 sec, ∆Psieve = 160 atm, ∆Pchamber = 0.0001
atm. Piston velocity ~ 60 micron/sec and V = 2.5 x 10-17 m3
/sec for
a 0.1 M solution of target molecules, yielding a processing rate of
1.5 x 109 molecules/sec (1.5 x 10-16 kg/sec); the device processes its
own mass every ~7 sec or every ~430 power strokes. Device power
Pdevice = 400 pW and power density Ddevice = 4 x 108
 watts/m3
.
For large molecules (rpore ~ 5.0 nm), an exemplar ~1 micron3
device has hchamber = 1 micron, Lchamber = Lsieve = 0.9 micron, hsieve =
0.15 microns, tp = 0.010 sec, ∆Psieve = 1 atm, ∆Pchamber = 0.0004 atm.
Piston velocity ~ 100 micron/sec and V = 9.8 x 10-17 m3
/sec for a
0.001 M solution of target molecules, yielding a processing rate of
5.9 x 107 molecules/sec (4.9 x 10-15 kg/sec); the device processes its
own mass every ~0.2 sec or every ~20 power strokes. Device power
Pdevice = 80 pW and power density Ddevice = 8 x 107
 watts/m3
.
Sieve pores can become clogged by particles of radius R ~ rpore if
the applied hydraulic pressure ∆Pclog exceeds the thermal energy of
the trapped particles, or:
∆Pclog > 9 kT / 8 π R3
 (N/m2
) {Eqn. 3.17}
By this criterion, ∆Pclog > 500 atm for small molecules and ∆Pclog
> 0.1 atm for large molecules. From the values of ∆Psieve given above,
clogging is unlikely for small molecules but is possible at the highest
concentrations of large molecules. In 310 K water, large molecules
diffuse ~3 nm and small molecules diffuse ~17 nm in ~10-7 sec, just
far enough to clear the hole, so a ~10 MHz sawtooth pressure profile
imposed on the power stroke may ensure sufficient backflushing
action to avoid serious blockages. To reduce the possibility of
clogging due to surface force adhesion (Section 9.2.3), as a design
criterion the work of adhesion should be reduced to Wadhesion < ∆Psieve
rpore ~ 5 x 10-3 J/m2 for small molecules and ~ 0.5 x 10-3 J/m2 for large
molecules likely to come into contact with sieve pore surfaces.
Clogging due to long-term random polymerizations can be
minimized by periodically exchanging the entire contents of the
input chamber with fresh solution, by operating the device at
reduced power density, or by periodically replacing the sieve.
3.3.2 Dynamic Pore Sizing
A more efficient nanosieve3251 system can be designed if pore
size and shape can be actively modified during device operation, as
for example by exchanging filters (from a membrane library stocking various pore sizes) each half cycle. Better, if pores can be reliably
dilated or constricted in place during a period of time ∆t << tp, then
filtration cascades can be more rapidly reconfigured to match changing
input feedstock characteristics or to extract varying selections of
desired molecules at will. Additionally, fully differentiating sieving
cascades can be collapsed into a single unit, providing more compact
devices especially useful in chemical sensor systems requiring
preconcentration of sample (Section 4.2.1). Control of pore shape
should also provide finer discrimination among molecules of similar
size but different shape, such as some isomers of nonchiral molecules.
Two or more overlapping surfaces containing regular arrays of
perforations of fixed size and shape can conveniently generate a wide
variety of pore geometries. Control of pore geometry is achieved by
sliding or rotating one surface relative to the other surface by a small
increment, as suggested schematically by the examples in Figure 3.3.
Circular dilating apertures can also be constructed using a
matched set of overlapping segments, which may be driven either
radially or tangentially to enlarge or contract the hole like an irising
camera diaphragm (Fig. 3.4), consistent with Akey’s model of the
nuclear pore complex present on the cell nucleus surface.1409
Diaphragming mechanisms may be vertically staggered to maximize
areal hole density in filtration surfaces (at the cost of increased
vertical rugosity). Filters constructed of hydrogen-passivated
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 79
diamondoid can have pores with <0.1 nm feature sizes, although
H-free fullerene materials might avoid any possibility of dehydrogenation shearing.
Methods of positioning surfaces to accuracies of ~0.01 atomic
diameter (~0.001 nm) are discussed in Section 3.5.6. Assuming pore
sizing blades require ~25 nm2 of diamondoid contact surface per
pore and each blade travels 25 nm at 0.01 meter/sec during one
cycle, sliding friction10 dissipates ~0.01 zJ/pore, or ~4 x 10-18 watts/
pore during each 2.5 microsec resizing cycle. Since fluid friction
approaches kT for nanometer-size holes changing size in ~10-9 sec,
maximum blade speed is ~1 m/sec and the fastest resizing cycle is
~10-8 sec.
A single sieving unit with controllable pores can be moderately
efficient. Consider a design similar to that described in Section 3.3.1,
except for a separate chamber and piston on either side of the filter
block. Suppose that the particles desired to be extracted are of
radius r, and the next smallest possible pore size is r - ∆r. The device
operates in two phases. In the first phase, the sample is placed in the
first chamber, pore size is set equal to r, then the first piston forces
the fluid through the membrane. Particles larger than r remain behind
and are flushed from the first chamber. The pores then
contract to r - ∆r, and the second piston pushes the remaining filtrate
back into the first chamber. After this second phase, particles of
radius ~(r ±∆r) remain in the second chamber at significantly higher
concentration and may be removed for further use. Analogous
double-sieve editing paradigms are commonplace in biological
systems.1520
Other designs might work equally well, such as a 3-chamber
flowthrough design using a variable pore membrane with pores of
size r between the first and second chamber, a membrane with pores
of size r - ∆r between the second and third chamber, and a piston at
either end (one pushing, one pulling), thus concentrating molecules of
size r ± ∆r in the central chamber. M. Krummenacker suggests fixed
chambers with a moving sieve operated as a dragnet. Filtration
processes may be most useful in performing complete separations
of complex mixtures. But they are inefficient in the sense that the
energy expended to orient molecules passing through pores is wasted
if the molecules are allowed to randomize on the other side; a eutactic
mill-like molecule handling system (Section 3.4.3) might preserve
this order and greatly improve energy efficiency.
3.3.3 Gated Channels
Besides controlling nanopore size and shape, individual molecular
transport channels can be gated either mechanically (e.g., ligand
gating)2348 or electrically (e.g., voltage gating).1050 Either method
might usefully be employed to control molecular transport through
the surfaces of medical nanodevices in a process that could very
loosely be described as molecular transistor gating.
A good example of mechanical gating in biology is the nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor channel, probably the best understood
ligand-gated channel.391,396 Nerve impulses are communicated across
neuromuscular junctions and autonomic ganglia via neurotransmitters
such as acetylcholine. STM images419 confirm that the receptor itself is
cylindrical, a bundle of 5 rod-shaped polypeptide subunits arranged
like barrel staves with outside diameter ~6.5 nm. The receptor
protrudes 6 nm on the synaptic side of the membrane and 2 nm on
the cytoplasmic side. The water-filled channel pore lies along the
symmetry axis, lined by 5 α-helices, with a 2.2 nm wide mouth on
the synaptic surface, a 0.65 nm waist where the structure dives
through the cell membrane, and a 2 nm wide cytosolic exit.
Normally, the channel is closed and no ions may pass. In this
closed state, the channel is occluded at the waist by a ridge of large
residues forming a tight hydrophobic ring. Each subunit has a bulky
leucine at the bend in the α-helix, a critical position. When two
acetylcholine molecules bind to the receptor, these helices allosterically
tilt, shifting the position of the ridges. The pore becomes open
because it is now lined with small polar residues rather than by large
hydrophobic ones. This conformational change allows 2.5 x 107
Na+ ions/sec to flow through the channel, about 10% of the
diffusion-limited rate. (Anions like Cl– cannot enter the pore
because they are repelled by rings of negatively charged residues
positioned at either end of the receptor.)
Acetylcholine binding opens the gate in less than 100 microsec
under physiologic conditions. Subsequent rapid destruction of
acetylcholine by acetylcholinesterase, an enzyme tethered to the
membrane surface by a covalently attached glycolipid group, closes
the gate in ~1 millisec. Much faster gating action (~10-8 - 10-6 sec)
could be achieved by nanodevices operating variable-scale nanopores
(Section 3.3.2) in response to sensor data or other control signals.
Such signals could drive the insertion or retraction of diamondoid
rods, wedges, or trapdoors across the channel lumen to regulate the
transmission of molecules having specific sizes, shapes, and charge
distributions.
Transport channels through nanodevice surfaces may also be gated
electrically.392 In contrast to the acetylcholine receptor, which is
relatively nondiscriminating and allows both inorganic and organic
cations to pass, the voltage-gated calcium channel has a highly
discriminating mechanism with a Ca++:Na+ permeation ratio on the
order of 1000:1. (The high specificity of the voltage-gated Ca++
channel is a consequence of a single-file pore mechanism involving
a pair of specific Ca++ ion binding sites. Selectivity is assured if either of
the two sites is occupied by Ca++, as monovalent ions do not bind
strongly enough to the free site or generate sufficient electrostatic
repulsion to push the first Ca++ ion through the channel.395) Potassium
channels1311,3435-3437 are 100 times more permeable to K+ than to
Na+
, and sodium channels favor the passage of Na+ over K+ by a
factor of 12. All three of these voltage-gated channels are important
in the generation and conduction of neural action potentials.
A nerve impulse is an electrical signal produced by the flow of
ions across the plasma membrane of a neuron. Neuron interiors
Fig. 3.4. Circular dilating “iris” diaphragm mechanism for dynamic
nanopore sizing.
80 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Fig. 3.5. Schematic of transporter molecular pump operation
(uniport).
have high concentrations of K+ and low concentrations of Na+
. The
resting potential of a neuron is -60 mV. An action potential may be
generated when the membrane potential is slightly depolarized to
-40 mV. This opens the Na+ voltage-gated channels, rapidly
accelerating depolarization to a peak of +30 mV in ~1 millisec. Then
Na+
 channels close and K+
 channels open, allowing K+
 ions to exit
the cell, restoring the -60 mV resting potential. Only ~1 ion of
every ~106 Na+ and K+ ions present in the local extracellular medium and the axoplasm participate in each such nerve impulse.
The sodium channel is a single polypeptide chain with four
repeating units. Each repeating unit folds into six transmembrane
alpha helices, including one that is positively charged called the S4
helix. The S4 helix is the voltage sensor that triggers the opening of
the gate. Three positively charged residues on each S4 helix are paired
at the resting membrane potential with negative charges on other
transmembrane helices in a staircase geometry. The initial small
depolarization event produces a spiral motion of each S4 accompanied
by the net movement of one or two charges to the extracellular side
of the membrane, essentially turning this left-handed
hydrogen-bonded “molecular screw” through a ~60˚ rotation.395
This outward 0.5-nm translation of the four S4 segments opens the
sodium gate by removing a steric barrier to ion flow. The energy
cost of moving ~6 electrical charges (~10-18 coul) from the cytosolic
to the extracellular side of the membrane against a ~100 mV potential
(thus opening the gate in ~75 microsec) is ~100 zJ. Quantum
tunneling activation of sodium channels, taking 1-1000 microsec,
has been analyzed by Chancey.679
Artificial ion-gated polymer membranes were reported in
1982,393 protein engineering of switchable pore-forming proteins
is well-known,880 and “intelligent gels” are being developed that
can change size and molecular porosity in response to chemical,
electrical or thermal stimuli. In 1998, however, electroporation was
a more commonly used method in biological research and a useful
technique for “transfecting” cells in genetic studies. Electroporation
employs a brief intense pulse of electricity to provide a force that
opens cellular pores, enabling the insertion of macromolecules like
DNA into cells of interest; laser pulses reduce cell loss to 10% by
using a square-wave pulse to effect rapid and reversible pore
formation.1295 Artificial pH-gated 200-nm diameter nanopores2335
and natural pH-gating of virion pores in the cowpea chlorotic mottle
virus2391 were demonstrated in 1998.
The first true voltage-gated nanomembrane was fabricated by
Charles Martin and colleagues in 1995.394 This membrane consists
of cylindrical gold nanotubules with inside diameters as small as
1.6 nm. When the tubules are positively charged, cations are
excluded and only negative ions are transported through the
membrane. When the membrane receives a negative voltage, only
positive ions are transported through the tubules. Nanodevices may
combine voltage gating with pore size and electrosteric constraints
to achieve precision transport control with moderate molecular
specificity at diffusion-limited throughput rates. In 1997, an ion
channel switch biosensor with sub-picomolar sensitivity and
quantitative detection time of ~600 sec was demonstrated by an
Australian research group.3039,3040
3.4 Receptor-Based Transport
The most efficient of all modes of molecular transport involves
receptor sites capable of recognizing and selectively binding specific
molecular species. Many receptors reliably bind only a single
molecular type; others, such as sugar transporters, can recognize
and transport several related sugar molecule types. In
nanomechanical systems, artificial binding sites of almost arbitrary
size, shape, and electronic charge may be created and employed in
the construction of a variety of highly efficient molecular sortation
and transport devices, described below. A discussion of binding sites
and receptor engineering follows in Section 3.5.
3.4.1 Transporter Pumps
While gated channels enable ions to flow rapidly through
membranes in a thermodynamically downhill direction, active
pumps use a source of free energy to force an uphill transport of
ions or molecules. In biology the energy supply is usually ATP or
photons of light; medical nanomachines can make use of vastly more
diverse energy sources (Chapter 6). Actually, the term “pump” may
be something of a misnomer because the action is highly specific—
only one or a very small number of molecular species are selectively
transported.
Molecular pumps generally operate in a four-phase sequence:
(1) recognition (and binding) by the transporter of the target molecule
from a variety of molecules presented to the pump in the input
substrate; (2) translocation of the target molecule through the
membrane, inside the transporter mechanism; (3) release of the
molecule by the transporter mechanism; and (4) return of the transporter to its original condition, so that it is ready to accept another
target molecule. Such molecular transporters that rely on protein
conformational changes are ubiquitous in biological systems, and
are illustrated schematically in Figure 3.5.
The minimum energy required to pump molecules is the change
in free energy ∆G in transporting the species from one environment
having concentration c1 to a second environment having concentration
c2, given by:

∆ ∆ G kT ln(c c ) Z F V
N 2 1 e
A
= + / {Eqn. 3.18}
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 81
where k = 0.01381 zJ/K (Boltzmann constant), T = 310 K, Ze is the
number of charges per molecule transported (i.e., the valency),
F = 9.65 x 104 coul/mole (Faraday constant), ∆V is the potential in
volts across the membrane, and NA is Avogadro’s number. So for
example, transport of an uncharged molecule across a c2/c1 = 103
gradient (typical in biology) costs ~30 zJ. An extremely aggressive
c2/c1 = 106 concentration gradient costs ~60 zJ/molecule, plus
another ~30 zJ/ion if we are moving Ca++ ions against a 100 mV
potential. An artificial nanopump of dimension ~10 nm moving at
a conservative ~1 cm/sec velocity operates at MHz frequencies,
transporting ~106 molecules/sec for a continuous power consumption
of ~0.03 pW at c2/c1 = 103
. Such a pump has a mass ~10-21 kg.
Transporter pumps need not be limited to the movement of a
single molecular species in a single direction, which biochemists
call a uniport transport mechanism.3649 Numerous well-known
biological systems are capable of moving two molecules simultaneously
in one direction (symport mechanisms), two molecules
sequentially in opposite directions (antiport mechanisms),3642-3648
and charged molecules in one direction only, thus building up
an electrical charge on one side of the membrane (electrogenic mechanisms).3633-3637,3643 Such pumps exist in nature for numerous ions,
amino acids, sugars, and other small biomolecules.398 Active drug
efflux systems400 and multidrug resistance399 are made possible by the
expression of bacterial genes coding for molecular pumps that are
constantly evolving new specificities to increasing numbers of
microbicidal drugs.
The action of the Na+ - K+ antiporter, a familiar ion pump present
in all mammalian cells, is illustrated in Figure 3.6. Three Na+ and
two K+ ions are transported per 10 millisec cycle, requiring the
hydrolysis of one ATP molecule to ADP to drive the conformational
changes. (More than one-third of the ATP consumed by a resting
animal is used to pump these two ions.) Hydrolysis of ATP liberates
~80 zJ/molecule of free energy, so the antiporter is transporting Na+
and K+ at a cost of 16 zJ/ion at a 0.5 KHz frequency. Pump site
density is ~1000/micron2 of cell membrane in neural C fibers.800
(The Na+ - K+ pump can also be operated in reverse to synthesize
ATP from ADP by exposing the mechanism to steep ionic gradients.)
By contrast, artificial nanomechanical antiporter and symporter
devices will operate at MHz frequencies.1177 They should be able to
transport much larger molecules, and may also be fully reversible.
3.4.2 Sorting Rotors
Drexler’s molecular sorting rotor10 is a related class of
nanomechanical device capable of selectively binding molecules from
solution and then transporting these bound molecules against
concentration gradients (Fig. 3.7). The archetypal sorting rotor is a
disk with 12 binding site “pockets” along the rim exposed alternately to
the external solution and interior chamber by axial rotation of the
disk. (Other designs may have more, or fewer, pockets.) Each pocket
selectively binds a specific molecule when exposed to the solution.
Once the binding site (Section 3.5) rotates to expose it to the
interior chamber, the bound molecules are forcibly ejected by rods
thrust outward by the cam surface (or using some other means by
which receptor affinity can be adjusted during the inbound transport
process). In the case of protein molecules, the debinding geometry
must be carefully designed to avoid denaturation during ejection.
Also, the rotor in Figure 3.7 implicitly assumes that target
molecules remain in the liquid or gaseous state after importation.
M. Krummenacker observes that most bloodborne molecular species will precipitate as solids unless they are well-solvated; thus
nanomedical sorting systems may require internal solvent or in some
cases should be made completely eutactic (Section 3.4.3). The discovery of positionally disordered water molecules resident inside
protein hydrophobic cavities1047 suggests that good rotor designs
may also need to include solvent drainage channels.
Molecular sorting rotors can be designed from about 105 atoms
(including housing and pro rata share of the drive system), measuring
roughly 7 nm x 14 nm x 14 nm in size with a mass of 2 x 10-21 kg.
Rotors turn at ~86,000 rev/sec with a conservative rim speed of 2.7
mm/sec and an almost negligible drag power of ~10-16 watts against
the fluid, sorting small molecules at a rate of 106 molecules/sec with
laminar flow. From Eqn. 3.18, the energy cost of small-molecule
sortation at 310 K ranges from ~10 zJ/molecule at low pressures
(c2/c1 = 10) up to ~40 zJ/molecule when pumping against the highest
head pressures (c2/c1 = 104
, ~30,000 atm for natural bloodstream
Fig. 3.6. Schematic of sodium-potassium antiporter ion pump
operation.
Fig. 3.7. Molecular sorting rotor (modified from Drexler10).
82 Nanomedicine • Volume I
concentrations of salt with osmotic pπ ~ 3 atm), consuming
0.01-0.04 pW per device in continuous operation. Rotors are fully
reversible, so they can be used to load or unload target molecules
depending on the direction of rotor rotation. Cylindrical rotors with
many receptor rows are somewhat more energy-efficient, and rotor
lifetimes10 should be >106
 sec (Chapter 13).
Typical molecular concentrations in the blood for target molecules
of nanomedical interest are ~10-11 – 10-3 molecules/nm3
, which
should be sufficient to ensure ~99% occupancy of rotor binding
sites (Section 3.5.2). Rotors targeting serum hormones and other
low-concentration species at the parts-per-billion level must slow to
<1 rev/sec to ensure complete receptor occupancy and to avoid
exceeding diffusion limits.
Sorting of ionically charged species can use binding sites that
display opposite charge, effectively increasing the affinity of the
binding site for the charged species. Many ionic species dissolved in
water are actually more complex than their symbolic representation
would suggest. As an example, a naked proton (H+
) in water is
always highly hydrated, usually as H5O2
+ or H7O3
+
,
996 or even as
H9O4
+ in strong acid solutions.2337 Small ions from Li+ to I– are
also found in solvent cages, bound with energies 330 zJ relative
to vacuum;2338 for instance, Li+ and I- are coordinated to 4-6 water
molecules.1149,3235 As a result, the design of an appropriate binding
site or filtration process for such ions can likewise become more
complex. The existence of biological channels that show remarkable
selectivity for specific ions (e.g., Na+ channels that largely exclude
K+ ions, and vice versa; Section 3.4.1) provides one design approach
for dealing with such species.
Drexler10 has also proposed cascades of sorting rotors (Fig. 3.8)
to achieve high fidelity purification and a contaminant fraction of
<10-15. However, since only ~1010 small molecules can be stored in
1 micron3 volume (typical for nanomedical devices), 100% process
purity requires a contaminant fraction of only <10-10 which can be
ensured in micron-scale nanosystems using at most 5 stages, starting
from a dilute input substrate containing only 1 part per billion of
the target molecule with each stage providing a concentration factor of
~104
. For statistically pure extractions of more common molecules
in blood and cytoplasm, a 3- or 4-stage cascade will usually suffice.
Note that the optimal receptor structure may differ at different stages
in a cascade,10 and that each 12-arm outbound rotor can contain
binding sites for 12 different impurity molecules. The first-stage
receptor will likely pass only a relatively small number of different
contaminant species, so the number of outbound rotors in the entire
system can probably be reduced to a small fraction of the number
of inbound rotors.
3.4.3 Internal Transport Streams
After pump mechanisms described above have reliably sorted
externally-encountered target molecules into reservoirs filled with
species of a single type, a medical nanodevice may require these
molecules to be transported to specific internal locations for further
processing. Bulk fluid flow or fluidized (solvated or suspended)
transport through nanopipes may suffice for some purposes
(Section 9.2.5). However, in many cases it will be necessary to present
reagent molecules to other subsystems as a well-ordered stream of
precisely positioned moieties transported in vacuo, especially for
mechanochemical operations (Chapter 19).
For this purpose, Drexler10 proposes molecular mills—eutactic
systems of nanoscale belts moving over rollers, with reagent-binding
devices mounted on the belt surface (Fig. 3.9). This class of device
can be assembled into complex molecular transportation networks
using conditional switching, crossed-axis belting, and transit
speed/frequency multipliers,10 and may also be employed to drive
mechanosynthetic chemical reactions. The benchmark mechanism
uses 10-nm diameter rollers to carry closely packed reagent devices
measuring 4 nm x 4 nm x 2 nm, or 32 nm3
. A 20-roller mill mechanism 1 micron long has a ~2 micron long belt with 500 reagent
devices and delivers 106 molecules/sec at a belt speed of 4 mm/sec.
Total power dissipation is ~1.4 x 10-18 watts, a rate of ~0.001 zJ per
moiety (or per reagent device) delivered or ~10-6 zJ/nm traveled per
reagent device. Total mill mechanism mass is ~6 x 10-20 kg.
An alternative to roller/belt mill mechanisms is a non-connected
stream of pallets pushed along tracks, also in vacuo. Such tracks
may include merging junctions, distribution junctions, multi-plane
crossings and switching stations, as well as straight and curved
sections. Assuming each pallet is a 32 nm3 reagent device held to
the track by pins in grooves resembling cam followers, energy
dissipation by phonon scattering10 is given approximately by:

P 4
3
 v
v drag
p therm
2
sound
= ε ω {Eqn. 3.19}
where εp = 2 x 108 joules/m3 (phonon energy density), σtherm (a
thermally-weighted scattering cross section) ~10-20 m2 for reagent
devices of mass m = 10-22 kg assuming a sliding contact of stiffness
~30 N/m in a moderately stiff medium, v = 4 mm/sec sliding speed,
and vsound = 104 m/sec (~speed of sound in diamond), giving Pdrag
~4 x 10-21 watts per reagent device, or Pdrag / v ~ 10-6 zJ/nm traveled
per reagent device (pallet). Note that volume containerization of
pallet-transported molecules is least efficient at the smallest scales,
where surface area per unit enclosed volume is highest, since energy
usage is proportional to the surface area of the carrier. Containerization
(Section 9.2.7.7) of n >> 1 molecules for large-pallet transport is
more efficient.
A less energy-efficient, but far more versatile, internal molecular
transport device is the 100-nm telescoping manipulator arm10
described in Section 9.3.1.4. This flexible ~10-19 kg device employs
a binding tip to pick and place small and large molecules alike,
moving them at ~1 cm/sec with repeatable placement accuracy of
0.04 nm. Multiple devices can be used to establish an internal ciliary
transport system (Section 9.3.4); standardized volume containerization
of molecules permits rapid stereotypical handoff motions and
efficient parcel routing. Conveyance through a 100-nm arc takes
10-5 sec consuming 0.1 pW while the arm is in motion, or ~10 zJ/nm
traveled per reagent molecule or per container transported (vs. ~1000 zJ
per typical covalent bond).
In molecular cytobiology, vesicles and organelles are transported
throughout the interior of a cell by riding on microtubular cables
crisscrossing the cytosol (Section 8.5.3.11). For example, neural
vesicles show transport speeds up to 2-4 microns/sec.938
3.5 Molecular Receptor Engineering
Molecular recognition requires a detailed surface
complementarity between the target molecule and its receptor. The
interplay of various molecular forces between ligand and receptor
causes them to selectively bind together, typically engineered to
occur in ~10-6 sec. It is useful first to briefly review and quantify the
principal physical forces at work.
3.5.1 Physical Forces in Molecular Recognition
Covalent bonds, which occur when atoms share electrons, are
the strongest bonds. Aside from metals and salts, most material
objects are made of atoms held together by covalent bonds. The
atoms comprising biological molecules like proteins, nucleic acids
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 83
and lipids are strung together mostly by single, double, or triple
covalent bonds, as are receptors and diamondoid nanomechanical
structures. Interatomic bond strengths range from 181 zJ/bond for
O-F up to 1785 zJ/bond for C-O.763 Covalent bond lengths range
from 0.10-0.16 nm within CHON-atom molecules, giving a typical
covalent bond rupture force of ~10 nN/bond.
But as Jean-Marie Lehn765 points out, “there is a chemistry
beyond the molecule”—noncovalent supramolecular chemistry
(Section 2.3.2). The bonds employed in molecular recognition are
weak noncovalent bonds. Noncovalent bonds are largely responsible
for the secondary and higher order structure of macromolecules. On a
per-bond basis, noncovalent bonds are 1-3 orders of magnitude weaker
than covalent bonds. However, the possibility of combining within
a limited area a great number of noncovalent bonds having complementary elements allows the formation of a large specific association
whose affinity may be of the same order of magnitude as a covalent
bond.401 The high combinatorial diversity provided by many
complementary elements allows numerous orthogonal specific
associations, enabling self-assembly of many components; by comparison, covalent chemistry offers a poor diversity of reactivities.
An additional advantage is that the formation of noncovalent bonds
often is not hindered by high energy barriers. At least five types of
noncovalent bonds may be distinguished: electrostatic, hydrogen,
van der Waals, π aromatic, and hydrophobic.
1. Electrostatic Bond — The electrostatic bond between two
charged particles (e.g., the “salt bridge” in proteins) is a dipole
interaction whose energy Ee is given by Coulomb’s law as:

E e
4
Z Z
r exp( K r) (joules) e
2
0
1 2
e
= dh








 

 − πε κ
{Eqn. 3.20}
where e = 1.60 x 10-19 coul (elementary charge), ε0 = 8.85 x
10-12 farad/m (permittivity constant), Z1 and Z2 are the numbers of
Fig. 3.8. Sorting rotor cascade (modified from Drexler10).
Fig. 3.9. Molecular mills for internal transport: simple transfer between two reservoirs.
84 Nanomedicine • Volume I
attractant charges, r is the distance between the charges, and κe is
the dielectric constant (74.3 for pure water at 310 K, usually
reduced to ~40 in a hydrophobic environment). The bond is
strengthened if the charges are in a hydrophobic environment.
Conversely, the presence of electrolytes weakens the bond
energy due to a shielding effect, given by Kdh, the Debye-Huckel
reciprocal length parameter, which has a value of 1.25 nm-1 for
0.15 M NaCl (~1% solution, ~human blood). Thus two unit charges
separated by 0.3 nm produce an interaction energy of Ee = 19 zJ in
a hydrophobic environment, 10 zJ in pure water, and 6.3 zJ in 1%
salt water. Long-range electrostatic trapping has been observed in
single-protein molecules at liquid-solid interfaces, raising the
implication that the interaction of protein molecules with biological
cell surfaces may be much more efficient than predicted by random
diffusion.2144
Most isolated amino acids in neutral solution are zwitterionic—
the molecule has no overall charge but carries both a negatively
charged group (carboxyl, CO2
–
) and a positively charged group
(amino, NH3
+
). In proteins the individual amino acids are polymerized, giving a peptide backbone which is electrically neutral
except for the ends of the chain. Most of the standard amino acids
found in proteins have uncharged side chains, although histidine,
lysine and arginine each have a positive charge at neutral pH and
both glutamic and aspartic acids normally carry a negative charge.
2. Hydrogen Bond — A second important noncovalent interaction
is the hydrogen bond, a dipole formed when a hydrogen atom
covalently bonded to an electronegative atom is shared with a second
electronegative atom (typically an oxygen, nitrogen or fluorine atom),
such that the proton may be approached very closely by an unshared
pair of electrons. Hydrogen bonds are largely responsible for the
unusual thermodynamic properties of water and ice, and the DNA
double-helical and protein α-helical and β-structure conformations
are extensively hydrogen bonded. Highest bonding energies occur
when donor and acceptor atoms are 0.26-0.31 nm apart. Typical
hydrogen bond strengths in proteins are 7-50 zJ.
3. Van der Waals Interaction — A third important noncovalent
force is van der Waals interactions (London dispersion forces).1149
There is an attractive component due to the induction of
complementary partial charges or dipoles in the electron density of
adjacent atoms when the electron orbitals of two atoms
approach to a close distance. There is also a strongly repulsive component at shorter distances, when the electron orbitals of the adjacent
atoms begin to overlap, commonly called steric hindrance. The van
der Waals attractive bonding energy between two parallel plates of
area A and separation zsep is approximated by:

E H A
12 z vdW
sep
2 = π
{Eqn. 3.21}
where the Hamaker constant H = 37 zJ for water, 66 zJ for glycerol,
340 zJ for diamond (Table 9.1). For A = 0.4 nm2 (small molecule),
zsep = 0.3 nm, then EvdW = 4 zJ (water) to 8 zJ (small organic
molecules)—close to the mean energy of a thermally excited harmonic
oscillator, kT ~ 4.3 zJ at 310 K. While van der Waals bonds are
individually very weak, they are also very numerous since they
involve all pairs of neighboring atoms. For example, experimental
analysis of an antigen molecule trapped in the anti-hen egg-white
lysozyme monoclonal antibody Fv active binding site found 86
distinct interatomic contact points with antigen-antibody separations
ranging from 0.25-0.46 nm, averaging 0.36 nm.416 Since
intermolecular dispersion forces act on all molecules, there are probably no ligands with MW > 400 daltons which cannot be receptored
(Section 3.5.5). That is, van der Waals interactions ensure that virtually all molecules of nanomedical interest are theoretically bindable
noncovalently.
4. Aromatic π Bonds — A fourth type of interaction (π electron
to π electron), called “aromatic” or “π” bonding, occurs when two
aromatic rings (conjugated π systems) approach each other with
the plane of their aromatic rings overlapping, with successive
π-bonded systems stacked like layers in a cake. This results in a
noncovalent attractive force with a bond strength of ~40-50 zJ. (That
is, the planes of conjugated π systems attract each other when
superimposed.) π bond stacking forces contribute to nucleic acid
stability at least as much as the hydrogen bonds between bases.401
5. Hydrophobic Forces — Finally, there are the strong hydrophobic
forces, due entirely to solvent entropy changes. When two nonpolar
residues approach each other, the surface area exposed to solvent is
reduced, increasing the entropy of all the water present and
decreasing the entropy of the residues, adding to the binding
energy a hydrophobic free energy of ~17 zJ/nm2
 of contact surface
area that was formerly exposed to water.413
In designing an artificial binding site, the above forces may be
combined to achieve the desired level of affinity and specificity for
a given ligand. All forces are not equally useful in this regard, however.
For example, hydrophobicity is the major factor in stabilizing
protein-protein associations.402 But hydrophobicity is almost entirely
nonspecific, hence contributes little to ligand discrimination. By
contrast, the proper formation of hydrogen bonds and van der Waals
contacts require complementarity of the surfaces involved. Such
surfaces must be able to pack closely together, creating many contact
points, and charged atoms must be properly positioned to make
electrostatic bonds. Thus van der Waals and polar interactions may
contribute little to the dynamic stability of the ligand-receptor
complex, but they do determine which molecular structures may
recognize each other.402 Other design elements of binding sites, such
as directed channeling of substrates into the receptor,2017 may also
prove useful.
In analyzing molecular forces, note that at the nanoscale level,
surface/surface, molecule/surface, and molecule/molecule interactions
may feature very complicated behaviors. Nanodevices performing
work may generate both thermodynamic and mechanical local
nonequilibrium conditions, so calculations based on the general
forms of interactions and on macroscopic expressions valid at
equilibrium conditions should be taken only as basic estimates.
3.5.2 Ligand-Receptor Affinity
For a ligand binding to a receptor in a solvent, there will be a
characteristic frequency with which existing ligand-receptor complexes
dissociate as a result of thermal excitation, and a characteristic
frequency with which empty receptors bind ligands as a result of
Brownian encounters, forming new complexes, with the frequency
of binding proportional to the concentration of the ligand in solution,
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 85
cligand (molecules/nm3
).10 For simple processes, the equilibrium
constant Kd, taken in the direction of dissociation, is:
Kd = kd / ka (molecules/nm3
) {Eqn. 3.22}
where kd is the dissociation rate constant (sec-1) and ka is the
association rate constant (nm3
/molecule-sec). The ka rate constant
reflects mainly the molecular weight of the ligand, and thus varies
little among antibody, enzyme, or other receptor systems. For example,
Delaage401 notes that changing the solution pH for growth hormone
from 7.5 to 4.0 increases Kd by a factor of 3000, due to kd increasing by
a factor of 1600 but ka decreasing only by a factor of 1.7. Hence it
is the rate constant of dissociation, kd, which accounts for the vast
bulk of affinity in receptor systems.
Thus receptor affinity is usually taken as the inverse of the
dissociation rate constant, which may be placed in the context of
the half-life of the ligand-receptor complex approximated401 by:
t1/2 ~ ln(2) / kd (sec) {Eqn. 3.23}
Observed half-lives range from <0.1 microsec (kd ~ 107 sec-1) for
the enzyme catalase to a few months (kd ~ 10-7 sec-1) for enzyme
inhibitors such as the Kunitz inhibitor of trypsin406 and for
avidin-biotin binding.407 The smaller the kd (or the Kd), the greater
the affinity and so the more firmly the receptor grasps the ligand.
The probability Poccupied that a receptor will be occupied10 is given
by:

P c
K occupied P ligand
d
= unoccupied





 {Eqn. 3.24}
where Punoccupied = 1 - Poccupied. To ensure Poccupied = 99% receptor
occupancy, Kd must ~ cligand / 100. For target molecules present at
the 10-3 - 10-11 gm/cm3 concentrations typically found in human
blood (Appendix B), cligand = 3 x 10-3 molecules/nm3 for glucose to
cligand ~ 10-11 molecules/nm3 for female serum testosterone, giving
a range of Kd ~ 10-4 - 10-13 molecules/nm3 to achieve 99% occupancy.
How much binding energy per receptor will this require? The
free energy of dissociation ∆Gd of a ligand-receptor complex is
related to its equilibrium dissociation constant Kd by:
∆Gd = - kT ln(Kd / K0) {Eqn. 3.25}
which refers to a standard reference state where all chemical species
are 1 M (i.e., K0 ~ 0.6 molecules/nm3
) and attributes a free energy
of zero to a complex with a dissociation constant of 1 M.402
For T = 310 K, the range of required Kd gives a range for ∆Gd of
39.4 zJ for glucose (at typical serum concentrations) to 128 zJ for
female serum testosterone.
However, when ligand and receptor associate there is a loss of
three degrees of freedom in each of translational and rotational
entropy, which may be estimated using the classical Sackur-Tetrode
equations, giving an entropic free energy range (for translation and
rotation combined) of ∆Gs = 80 zJ for very small molecules (MW
~10 daltons), to 120 zJ (MW ~102 daltons), 200 zJ (MW ~104
daltons), and 280 zJ for large molecules (MW ~106
 daltons).427
Thus to form a ligand-receptor complex with a dissociation
constant Kd, the receptor design must provide a free energy of binding
of at least:
∆Gtotal = ∆Gd + ∆Gs {Eqn. 3.26}
or 120-410 zJ/molecule for designed receptors achieving 99%
occupancy operating over the likely range of physiological
concentrations and temperatures. This is consistent with Drexler’s
estimate of 161 zJ binding energy required to ensure reliable receptor
occupancy for small plentiful molecules.10
3.5.3 Ligand-Receptor Specificity
While affinity measures the strength of the binding of a ligand
to a receptor, specificity defines the degree to which a receptor can
distinguish between similar ligands. That is, the affinity of the target
molecule for the receptor must be greater than the affinity of any
other ligand in the environment that is competing for that same
receptor, by some threshold multiple.
How much greater is enough? In natural dynamic cellular systems,
the threshold multiple appears to be a factor of ~102
-103
. For example,
the carrier which expels Ca++ from erythrocytes presents a variation
in Kd of 10-6 to 10-3 in going from the interior to the exterior of the
cell.404The active transport of amino acids by hepatocytes normally
involves Kd ~10-1, but under conditions of deprivation a high affinity
carrier with Kd ~10-3 comes into play.405
However, the key to assessing specificity in the nanomedical
context would be to tally all the competing molecules in the in vivo
environment, determine which are the nearest competitors, and then
design to avoid them by imposing appropriate energy barriers. By
1998, only a very few competitive ligand-receptor binding analyses
had been performed.1078 Until a complete molecular inventory of
the human body becomes available, the following crude estimate of
nearest-neighbor differences must suffice.
The human body contains a minimum of Nprot ~105 distinguishable proteins (Section 3.1). The maximum number of distinguishable
proteins in the biosphere was given by Kauffman766 who estimates
a useful biological catalytic task space of Nprot ~108 distinct protein
forms, a tiny subset of the ~20500 possible 500-residue protein
sequences. If the average protein is constructed from Nresidue ~500
amino acids (MW ~50,000 daltons), then the average protein may
differ from its most similar neighbor by nvar ~log (Nprot)/log (Nresidue)
= 1.9-3.0 residues. (The precise magnitudes of Nprot and Nresidue are
not crucial to our conclusion.) Most proteins are confined to cells
containing Nprot ~ 5000 different protein types each (Table 3.2);
given that evolution has probably optimized local specificity to
ensure that closely competing crucial ligands rarely appear in the
same cell, it seems reasonable to assume that the average
closest-neighbor ligand may differ from the average target ligand by
at least nvar ~ 1 residue.
How much is receptor affinity reduced when binding molecules
differing by nvar ~1 residue from the target ligand on
receptor-accessible surfaces—the minimum threshold required to
ensure specificity within a cell? In one experiment the relative affinity
of an antibody constructed for succinylglycinamide-linked histamine
(histamine-SGA), which was the target molecule, and the same
molecule but with one methyl group or one carboxylic group removed
and replaced with a hydrogen, was 1.45 x 104 or 2.5 x 105
, respectively,
due to steric hindrance.401 Similar investigations with antibodies
for SGA-linked serotonin produced relative affinities of 500-1000,408
and with antibodies for single alanine substitutions in Human
Growth Hormone (HGH), ~1000.418 The relative affinity of a
particular RNA oligomer for theophylline and caffeine, two ligands
which differ by only a single methyl group, was measured experimentally as 10,900.1078 Computational receptor experiments in
which CH replaces N suggest a decline in relative affinity of
~5x104
.
10 Indeed, the change of a single hydrogen atom on a ligand
is usually sufficient to destroy its specificity for, or activity within, a
particular enzyme. The single-residue affinity reduction at a
receptor-accessible surface appears to be of order ~103
 - 105
.
86 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Fig. 3.10. Experimental RMS fluctuations in ferrocytochrome C
(residue averages shown as function of residue number; redrawn
from Karplus and McCammon409).
Each increase of ~10 zJ in bonding energy causes the reaction
equilibrium constant to decline (hence receptor affinity to rise) by a
factor of ~10 (Eqn. 3.25). If a difference in affinities of ~103
-105
between the target molecule and its nearest competitor likely to be
present in the environment provides sufficient receptor specificity
for nanomedical purposes, this requirement corresponds to a binding
energy differential affinity of ~30-50 zJ at 310 K between target
and closest-neighbor ligands.
3.5.4 Ligand-Receptor Dynamics
Diamondoid structures can exhibit a stiffness and rigidity one
or two orders of magnitude greater than that available in protein
structures. In general, stiffer structures permit greater specificity
because they enhance exclusion of non-target ligands based on van
der Waals overlap forces (called steric hindrance) and allow narrower
tolerances in distinguishing acceptable ligands.
In less-stiff protein-based receptors, each of the atoms is engaged
in relatively large, rapid jiggling movements. Experimental and
theoretical work has been done on the atomic fluctuations within
the basic pancreatic trypsin molecule, a small enzyme with 58 amino
acids and 454 heavy (non-hydrogen) atoms. This work established
that fluctuations increase with distance from the center of the
molecule, with the magnitude of RMS fluctuations ranging from
~0.04 nm for backbone atoms to ~0.15 nm for the ends of long side
chains (roughly one atomic diameter), and an average of 0.069-0.076
nm per atom over the entire molecule.409 A similar experimental
analysis of reduced cytochrome c, a common metabolic enzyme,
shows that RMS fluctuations of each of the 103 amino acid residues in
the molecule averages ~0.11 nm with lattice disorder (~0.05 nm)
included, and fluctuations range from 0.09-0.16 nm (Fig. 3.10).
Antibody core domain movements display RMS fluctuations of
0.04-0.19 nm.412 Hence it appears that the average atom within
the typical protein receptor oscillates ~0.1 nm every ~10-12 sec,
although frequently residues with long side chains (e.g., arg, lys)
have much higher RMS deviations than average.
By contrast, in stiff diamondoid-based receptors each of the atoms
is locked in a rigid crystalline structure and thus is subject to thermal
displacements approximately 10 times smaller. The RMS displacement for a quantum mechanical harmonic oscillator10 is given by:

∆ ω
ω / X k
1
2
1
s e 1 kT
1/2
= 

 

 + −


 

 

 


h
h {Eqn. 3.27}
where  = 1.055 x 10-34 joule-sec, kT = 4.28 zJ at T = 310 K, and
angular frequency ω = (ks/µred)
1/2 rad/sec where ks is mechanical
stiffness and µred is the reduced mass = m1m2/(m1 + m2). For C-C
atoms (e.g., in the receptor body), ks = 440 N/m, m1 = m2 = 2x10-26
kg, thus ω = 2.1 x 1014 rad/sec, so the RMS displacement of each
atom is only ~0.005 nm every ~3 x 10-14 sec. For C-H atoms (e.g.,
on the hydrogen passivated receptor surface), ks = 460 N/m, m1
= 2 x 10-26 kg (C), and m2 = 1.673 x 10-27 kg (H), thus ω = 5.5 x
1014 rad/sec, so the RMS displacement of each atom is ~0.008 nm
every ~1 x 10-14 sec. Similarly, at 310 K the RMS thermal displacement
of a 1-nm wide, 10-nm long diamondoid rod is ~0.01 nm, including
elastic and entropic contributions.10
The ratio of RMS displacements for protein/diamondoid receptors
is ~10:1, so the minimum addressable volume (hence inverse
maximum specificity) of a diamondoid receptor should be ~103
smaller than for protein receptors, a ~30 zJ binding energy advantage
for diamondoid receptors.
3.5.5 Diamondoid Receptor Design
Natural enzymes and antibodies are proteins folded into highly
organized, preformed shapes that present a ready-made “keyhole”
into which a target ligand will fit. The enzyme is folded in such a
way as to create a region that has the correct molecular dimensions,
the appropriate topology, and the optimal alignment of counterionic
groups and hydrophobic regions to bind a specific target molecule.
Tolerances in the active sites can be narrow enough to exclude one
isomer of a diastereomeric pair. For example, D-amino acid oxidase
will bind only D-amino acids, not L-amino acids.
These “keyholes” are extremely floppy, yet still achieve fair
specificity. This is a consequence of “induced fit” in protein binding
sites. That is, the interaction of the target molecule with an enzyme
induces a conformational change in the enzyme, resulting in the
formation of a strongly binding site and the repositioning of the
appropriate amino acids to form the active site. The receptor flexes,
balloons, hinges, or contracts by 0.05-1.0 nm in just the right places
to maximize specificity as the selected ligand enters the site. In some
cases such as O2 and CO binding by myoglobin, ligands enter the
receptor through a series of temporary voids that appear and disappear
in the receptor as ~10 picosec dynamic structural fluctuations.409
Induced fit can reduce receptivity to undesired proteins that exploit
relative geometry by bonding enough to bring portions of their
surfaces into alignment with the same receptor sites that bind desired
proteins. Folding transitions appear to be the most prevalent and to
possess the most possibilities for adaptability or induced fit.1068
For smaller molecules, it is likely that recognition processes will
be relatively inefficient, time-consuming, and more difficult to
engineer if they involve a good deal of rearrangement of the receptor’s
shape.382 Thus there is considerable interest among chemists in
designing artificial receptors that have their cavities already formed
into the shape appropriate for the intended substrate.1057 For
instance, rigid-cavity “spherand” receptors are exceptionally efficient
at binding metal ions.410 Bowl-shaped molecules such as
cryptaspherands, calixarenes, and carcerands can be lined with
chemical groups along their walls and with charged groups along
their rims to achieve high binding specificity.410,411,1262
Self-assembling capsules or “container molecules” made of
hydrogen-bonded subunits, capable of limited molecular recognition,
have been synthesized.2143,2336 A designed receptor for creatinine
was demonstrated in 1995,222 and in 1998, K. Suslick and colleagues2714
designed metalloporphyrin-dendrimeric artificial receptors that can
bind straight, skinny molecules but block out bent or fat molecules.
Container molecules with 0.2-0.4 nm portals control entry to their
interiors using “French door” and “sliding door” gates417 and
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 87
hinges.2548 Active binding sites for small simple molecules such as
NO,2912,2913 CO,3228 and C2H4
2914 are well-known.
Ultimately, receptors will be designed to nanoscale precision and
may be constructed using diamondoid materials.1199 Electrostatic,
hydrophobic, and hydrogen-bond forces will add immensely to
artificial receptor specificity and are essential for binding small
molecules. For example, using a 0.2-nm range in a saline environment,
10-40 charge contacts would be required to bind molecules of
various sizes and concentrations using electrostatic force alone, which
is ~0.5 charge/nm2 over the entire surface of a 60,000 dalton globular
protein (vs. ~1 charge/nm2 for the surface of an isolated zwitterionic
amino acid). Or, a 7 nm2 hydrophobic cavity having the exact folded
shape of the target ligand generates ~120 zJ binding energy as the
molecule stuffs itself into the cavity to exclude its surface from solvent
water.
But consider a theoretical receptor that employs van der Waals
dispersion forces alone. Atoms comprising the typical protein or
CHON target molecule in the human body have an average atomic
mass of ~6 amu/atom and an average density of 1500 kg/m3
, giving
a mean molecular volume of ~6.7 x 10-30 m3 per atom in the target
molecule. Assume for simplicity a spherical receptor surface that
forms a negative image of the surface of the target molecule. The
receptor surface lies ~1.5 x (minimum van der Waals contact
distance) ~0.3 nm from the perimeter atoms of the target molecule,
and completely encloses the target molecule (thus requiring at least
one moving part). Table 3.6 shows that the theoretically available
maximum binding energy EvdW, using only dispersion forces (from
Eqn. 3.21), should be sufficient to adequately bind all but the smallest target molecules according to the criteria set forth in Section
3.5.2. (Proteins are actually ellipsoidal with a much larger surface
area Ap = 0.111 MW2/3 nm2
,
413 than if they were spherical*, so
Table 3.6 figures are conservative for protein binding; proteins
typically have a ~60%-85% interior packing density.3211) Dispersion
forces alone can provide the minimum required binding energy of
~120 zJ with Ap ~6 nm2 of contact surface (MW > 400 daltons) at
0.3 nm mean range, and dispersion-force receptors can offer
exceptionally high affinities for molecules >1000 atoms.
What about specificity? Given the ability to design diamondoid
binding sites to at least localized <0.01 nm tolerances, chirality is
readily detected and (purely as a design exercise) it may even be
possible to distinguish diatomic nitrogen and oxygen on the basis
of size alone. The molecular lengths (major axis) of N2 and O2 are
0.250 nm and 0.253 nm, but the molecular widths (minor axis) are
0.140 nm and 0.132 nm, respectively. (Diatomic molecules get
longer and narrower at higher molecular weight.) Thus N2 is
distinguishable from O2 on the basis of width (~0.01 nm). With a
van der Waals energy well depth of 1.1-1.4 zJ for N2 and O2, in a
tight receptor these gases are bound at an energy density corresponding
to 3000-4000 atm of pressure.
3.5.6 Minimum Feature Size and Positioning Accuracy
Maximum displacement measurement accuracy in nanoscale
devices is ~0.01 nm (Section 4.3.1), and RMS thermal displacement
in diamondoid bonds is ~0.01 nm at 310 K (Section 3.5.4). Thermal displacements in 10-nm long diamondoid rods are ~0.01 nm
at a 1-nm rod width, ~0.02 nm at 0.5-nm width, and ~0.10 nm at
0.3-nm width.10 However, it is possible to construct components
to even narrower tolerances.
For instance, a single C-O bond inserted into a diamondoid rod
in a collinear carbon chain extends rod length by 0.1402 nm, the
C-O bond length. An adjacent rod into which an N-N bond is
similarly inserted is extended by 0.1381 nm, the N-N bond length.
By bonding these rods (aligned at one end) it is possible to build
diamondoid structures having 0.002-nm features** (at the other
end), which at 310 K will nonetheless suffer thermal displacements
of ~0.01 nm or more. Similarly tiny displacements can be induced
in binding cavity surfaces by inserting a foreign atom deep inside
the bulk diamondoid structure, causing dislocation strains that
decline in magnitude at greater distances from the compositional
disturbance.***
*The formula for Ap is valid for small and medium size monomeric proteins (50-320 residues). The ratio of actual protein surface area to the surface area of a smooth ellipsoid
of equal volume increases with molecular weight, since larger proteins are more highly textured and aspherical in shape. For oligomers whose monomers have 330-840 residues,
surface areas ~MW and are 20%-50% greater than those given by Ap.
**For even finer feature control, the ground state atomic radius Ra depends on nuclear mass (mn), proton mass (mp) and electron mass (me) through the reduced mass of
the electron µe = me mn / (me + mn) ~ me (1 - (1836 Amass)-1), or Ra ~ 1/µe, where Amass is nucleus mass number and mp/me = 1836. Thus, a 25-nm rod consisting of 162 planes
of C12 atoms is ~0.1 picometer (pm) longer than a 162-plane rod of C13 atoms; a single ground-state deuterium atom is measured as ~0.4 pm smaller than a hydrogen atom.
SQUIDs and x-ray interferometers have been used to measure displacements of 10-7 nm, or ~1% of the nuclear diameter.445
***J. Soreff points out that such strain fields have components at various spatial frequencies, and that at high spatial frequencies there is much design freedom but the effects
decay exponentially with a short characteristic length, hence design choices are not spread uniformly throughout the constraint space but rather are clustered. As a result,
it may not be possible to achieve a 0.01-nm designed receptor topography simultaneously everywhere across an entire binding surface, nor may it be possible via surface binding
alone to distinguish molecules which differ only deep in their interiors.
Table 3.6 Maximum Binding Energy Available in a Dispersion-Force Receptor with 0.3-nm Contact Boundary for CHON
Target Molecules of Various Sizes
Mean # of Approx. Spherical Spherical Spherical Maximum vdW
Atoms in Molecular Surface Area Surface Receptor Binding Energy
Target Weight of Target Area of Cavity Theoretically
Molecule (daltons) Molecule Receptor Volume Available
10 60 0.80 nm2 2.6 nm2 0.39 nm3 16 zJ
102 600 3.7 nm2 6.9 nm2 1.7 nm3 72 zJ
103 6,000 17 nm2 24 nm2 11 nm3 330 zJ
104 60,000 80 nm2 93 nm2 84 nm3 1600 zJ
105 600,000 370 nm2 400 nm2 740 nm3 7200 zJ
88 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Fig. 3.11. Imprint model for creating artificial molecular receptors
(redrawn from Ansell, Ramstrom and Mosbach422).
It is also possible to translate diamondoid components through
a picometer step size,433 much smaller than the unavoidable RMS
thermal displacements, using any of several methods; for example:
A. Levers — Consider a 10-nm lever joined to a fixed bar by a
pivot at one end, and driven axially by a ratchet interposed between
lever and bar at the other end. Ratchet movements translate to smaller
displacements at positions along the lever distant from the ratchet.
Thus a follower rod attached to the lever 1 nm from the pivot and
driven by a ratchet with 0.01-nm steps moves ~0.001 nm per ratchet
step.
B. Screws — Consider a 3-nm diameter cylindrical screw with a
1-nm pitch. Rotating the screw through a 0.01-nm circumferential
displacement causes the screw to move laterally by ~0.001 nm, which
may be transmitted elsewhere in the machine by an
attached follower rod. Of course, nanoscale screws or gears are sensitive
to the precise cancellation of the potentials and hence cannot be
perfectly smooth and circular, producing some
unavoidable “knobbiness” under load.
C. Gear Trains — Consider a 32-nm diameter worm gear with
1-nm teeth. One rotation of the gear requires 100 rotations of the
worm; hence a 0.1 nm displacement applied to the worm
produces a 0.001 nm displacement in the gear. More efficient (and
coaxial) compound planetary gear trains commonly employed in
transmissions achieve displacement ratios up to 10,000:1, a hundred
times better than the above example.
D. Hydraulics — Consider a sealed, fluid-filled, tapered pipe. A
piston 1000 nm2 in area is mounted at one end; another piston 10
nm2 in area lies at the other end. A displacement of 0.1 nm applied
to the smaller piston produces a 0.001 nm displacement in the larger
piston. (Here again the finite size of molecules may produce
“knobby” performance as fluid particles slip from one stable configuration to the next.)
E. Compression — Consider a rod upon which a compressive
force of 100 nN/nm2 (near the maximum diamondoid strength)
has been imposed. Affixed to the rod are two crossbars spaced 4 nm
apart. If the force on the rod is increased to 101 nN/nm2
, the gap
between the crossbars compresses by ~0.001 nm.
3.5.7 Receptor Configurations
Many different useful receptor configurations may be readily
envisioned, of which the following brief descriptions are but a small
sample. Note that most large target molecules of nanomedical
interest are proteins which are probably floppy enough to permit
entry into reasonably open multiply-concave rigid receptor structures;
if not, hinges are easily added to the receptor design.
3.5.7.1 Imprint Model
Molecular imprinting421,422 is an existing technique in which a
cocktail of functionalized monomers interacts reversibly with a target
molecule using only noncovalent forces. The complex is then
cross-linked and polymerized in a casting procedure, leaving
behind a polymer with recognition sites complementary to the target
molecule in both shape and functionality (Fig. 3.11). Each such site
constitutes an induced molecular “memory,” capable of selectively
binding the target species. In one experiment involving an amino
acid derivative target, one artificial binding site per (3.8 nm)3 polymer
block was created, only slightly larger than the (2.7 nm)3 sorting
rotor receptors described by Drexler10 (Section 3.4.2). Chiral
separations, enzymatic transition state activity, and high receptor
affinities up to Kd ~ 10-7 have been demonstrated, with specificity
against closely competing ligands up to ∆Kd ~ 10-2 (~20 zJ).
Several difficulties with this approach from a diamondoid
engineering perspective include:
1. A sample of the target molecule is required to make each mold.
2. It is currently unknown how to prepare diamondoid castings.
3. Once the imprint has been taken, the site cannot easily be further
modified.
3.5.7.2 Solid Mosaic Model
In the solid mosaic receptor model, the precise shape and charge
distribution of the target molecule is already known. Working from
this information, a set of diamondoid components could be fabricated
which, when fitted together like a Chinese puzzle box, create a solid
object having a cavity in the precise shape of the optimum negative
image of the target molecule (Fig. 3.12A). The mosaic may contain
point charges, voids, stressed surfaces, or dislocations to achieve fine
positional control. Mosaic components may be as small as
individual atoms, so this model is conceptually similar to 3D printing
or raster-scan techniques in which the desired cavity formation is
constructed atom by atom inside a nanofactory (Fig. 3.12B; Chapter
19). This model, like the imprint model, cannot easily be
reconfigured once it has been constructed because each of the many
unique parts may contribute to the entire structure. The construction
of receptors from parts of fixed size and shape is crudely analogous
to members of the heterodimer receptor class (a two-component
receptor) such as GABAB.
2687
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 89
M. Reza Ghadiri has designed a protein mosaic model using
cyclic peptides that assemble spontaneously into nanotubes of predefined diameter; incorporation of hydrophobic amino acid side
chains on the outside of these tubes leads to spontaneous insertion
into bilayers, allowing the tubes to function as transmembrane ion
channels.2440 Other examples of mosaic model receptors are
mesoporous silica filters with functionalized organic monolayers
forming 3-6 nm sieve-like pores,693,1522 and zeolites and zeolite-like
molecular sieves. Zeolites are artificial crystal structures with precise
and uniform 0.4-1.5 nm internal void arrays which can also be used
as shape-selective catalysts able to favor one product over another
that differs in size by as little as 0.03 nm, such as p-xylene and
o-xylene.430 By 1998, rational de novo computational design of
artificial zeolite templates431,432,934 and crystal engineering695,948 had
begun.
3.5.7.3 Tomographic Model
In the tomographic receptor model, the receptor engineer again
starts with a known target molecule topography and designs a series
of thin planar sections which, when stacked together in the correct
order (using positionally-coded docking pins) and bonded, create a
solid object containing the desired optimum binding cavity (Fig. 3.13).
As in the mosaic model, point charges or dislocations in each planar
segment can be used to manipulate cavity features and dimensions
to precise tolerances. Unlike the mosaic model, a tomographic
receptor can be reconfigured by partial disassembly and replacement
Fig. 3.12A. 2-D schematic representation of a 3-D solid mosaic model artificial receptor: Multiform block design.
Fig. 3.12B. 2-D schematic representation of a 3-D solid mosaic
model artificial receptor: raster scan design.
Fig. 3.13. Schematic representation of tomographic model for a
reconfigurable artificial molecular receptor.
90 Nanomedicine • Volume I
of specific planar segments, each of which contributes only locally
to the total receptor structure. Hybrid or modular artificial
enzymes651,692 and two-dimensional sheetlike hydrogen-bonded
networks695 are crude analogs in current research.
3.5.7.4 Pin Cushion Model
The pin cushion receptor, suggested independently by K.E.
Drexler [personal communication, 1996], is a hemispheroidal or
hemiellipsoidal shell through which a number of rods protrude, each
of which may be moved radially (Fig. 3.14). When inserted through
the shell to varying depths, the endpoints of the rods define a negative
image surface which may be made to mirror the topography and
charge distribution of a known target molecule. Rods may be tipped
with positive, negative or no charge, or they may terminate in any
number of functionalized surface segments designed to optimally
match parts of the target molecule shape. Other configurations such
as a rectangular box, hinged plates with protruding rods,
counterrotating rollers, or time-varying rod positioners are readily
conceivable. Pin cushion receptors are easily reconfigured to bind
different target molecules, hence may be regarded as fully programmable “universal” binding sites. The principal difficulty with the
pin cushion receptor is its excessive size (compared to other receptor
models) and its greater complexity (since each rod may be controllable
individually).
Pin cushion receptors can also be used to discover the shapes of
unknown molecules (Section 3.5.8): A target molecule is placed in
the central cavity with all rods fully retracted, and the rods are slowly
slid forward using nanopistons with force reflection feedback, until
all pistons register zero force, indicating balance between attractive
and repulsive van der Waals interactions, at which point all rod
positions are recorded. Rods of differing end tip charge may then
be tested for additional attractive potential. The final result is a precise
mapping of the target molecule, which data may be stored or
transmitted elsewhere for future use.
3.5.7.5 Construction Costs
The active binding site of a receptor consisting of (2.7 nm)3
~19 nm3 of structural atoms and constructed with 0.001-nm feature
sizes in theory requires information from 2 x 1010 voxels (volume
pixels) for complete description. However, there are only Natom
~1000 atoms involved in the structure and their locations cannot
be arbitrarily chosen. Atomic scale (~0.1 nm) resolution would
require ~19,000 voxels; each voxel minimally requires an index number (~log2
(19,000) ~14 bits), an atomic identifier (~log2
(92) ~7 bits),
and a charge identifier (~log2(3) ~2 bits), for a total of 23 bits/voxel
which gives 4 x 105
 bits/receptor at atomic scale resolution. Drexler10
estimates the number of configurational options per atom Nopt ~ 150;
hence a description of the receptor could require as few as Natom
log2(Nopt) ~ 7 x 103 bits.* Assuming energy dissipation of
~3 zJ/bit for rod logic register reading10 or ~kT ln (2) (Eqn. 7.1),
then each time the receptor description is retrieved, stored or
processed may require a minimum energy dissipation of ~104
-106
zJ. Reversible computing may reduce this energy requirement by a
factor of 10-100 or more (Section 10.2.4.1). Construction of a
receptor containing ~1000 atoms using the nanomanipulator arm
mentioned in Section 3.4.3 requires ~10-2 sec and consumes ~0.001
picojoule (~106
 zJ) of mechanical energy.
3.5.7.6 Receptor Durability
Receptor durability is difficult to estimate ab initio. Molecularly
imprinted polymer sites can be stored at least several years without
loss of performance, but these receptors have only been tested to
100 cycles of use without any detectable loss of memory.422 The
lifetime in vivo for metabolic enzymes often exceeds ~105 sec (~1
day),172 and taste cell receptors survive ~106 sec (~2 weeks),423 which
suggests operational lifetimes for natural receptors on the order of
107
-1012 cycles despite the relative fragility of protein structures.
Diamondoid structures should be even more durable because of
their superior physical strength, affirmative forcible ejection of bound
ligands each cycle, and high resistance to chemical degradation thus
reducing susceptibility to poisoning.
3.5.8 Ligand-Receptor Mapping
To achieve a fully general-purpose receptor capability in
nanomedical systems, two classes of analytic function are essential.
First, presented with an arbitrary molecule, the system or user
must be able to infer from the molecule’s structure the shape and
electronic configuration of an optimal receptor geometry that will
*Higher level descriptions may allow considerable additional information compaction, as for instance where a 30-bit word indexes a single receptor structure stored in a library
containing perhaps 109
 distinct designs.
Fig. 3.14. Pin cushion model for a reconfigurable artificial molecular
receptor (planar cutaway section omitting sensors and drive
mechanisms).
Fig. 3.15. Relative dimensions of some typical proteins (mol. wt. in
daltons).
Basic Capabilities • Molecular Transport and Sortation 91
efficiently bind it, with a particular affinity and specificity (as a
design specification). This discovery procedure may involve a process
akin to molecular imprinting (Section 3.5.7.1), fluorescent dye
affinity matching on testing chips (Chapter 20), Structure-Activity
Relationships (SAR) by NMR techniques,424 or pin cushion receptor
mapping (Section 3.5.7.4).
Second, presented with an arbitrary protein-built binding site
embedded in living tissue, the system or user must be able to infer
the molecule(s) which the given receptor could bind, and to compute
the affinity and specificity of that activity. This capability may
require a rather diverse steric toolkit. Biological receptors are
constructed in one of ~500-1000 distinct shapes or “domains,” such
as the well-known Y-shaped antibody immunoglobulin domain
(~100 residues) and other assorted clefts, folds, kringles and coils.
Several hundred distinct fold families are known, though it is believed
there are only ~20 major domain types,414 and Chothia2604 believes
that “the large majority of proteins come from no more than one
thousand families.”
One mapping technique would employ a series of rodlike probes
inserted into the receptor cavity like a pick gun or other lockpicking
tool. After physically securing the receptor, the first crude probes
quickly map the cavity to nanometer scale. Based on this preliminary
information, subsequent probes having ever-finer discrimination
chart smaller features as well as charge distributions by inserting a
predetermined set of test rods with functionalized tips in a standard
sequence, to rapidly prune the huge configurational space down to
a single unique electrophysical shape using the minimum possible
number of tests. (A 1 nm3 volume of multi-element diamondoid
receptor structure has ~10148 possible distinct configurations, by
one conservative estimate,10 requiring at least 492 binary tests to
eliminate all but one configuration. Antibody domains contain ~1050
possible configurations, requiring 166 binary tests.) Cavity Stuffer,
a software package comprising an experimental design tool to
investigate automated cram-packing of predefined cavities using
randomly branched polymers, is a preliminary effort in this general
direction,425 although the algorithmic task of discovering an
unknown receptor contour may be considerably more challenging.
Another approach to receptor mapping would be the reversible
chemical or mechanical denaturation of the receptor protein
followed by precise nondestructive amino acid sequencing (Chapter 20), from which tertiary structure and activity could then be
computationally inferred. Algorithms to perform such computations
are the subject of intense current research interest.952 Even imperfect
tertiary structure predictions should greatly reduce the search space,
so that only a partial residue sequencing may be necessary for
unambiguous identification from a library of possible proteins. Once
the target ligand structure has been inferred, the subsequent design
and manufacture of receptor-specific agonists and antagonists,
including catalysts and cofactors, activators and inhibitors, promoters
and repressors, should be comparatively easy.
3.5.9 Large Molecule Binding, Sorting and Transport
Is there any size limit for target molecules to be transported?
Natural receptors have already been found for large molecules
including low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) > 1,000,000 daltons426
and high-density lipoproteins (HDLs).1038
The methods described in earlier Sections can be adapted for
binding large molecules (>1000 atoms; Fig. 3.15), including molecules
far wider than the binding device itself (e.g., ~200-nm diameter
virus particles and larger). Making a binding site for a large molecule
should be physically easier (albeit computationally more challenging)
than making a binding site for a small molecule because of the greatly
increased area of interaction. For example, a binding energy of 400 zJ
may be realized by creating a dispersion-force binding area covering
only ~25% of the surface of a 10,000-atom target molecule (Table
3.6) or a mere ~0.02% of a 200-nm virus particle.
Fig. 3.16. Schematic of large-molecule shuttle pump using fragmentable binding ring and iris diaphragms.
92 Nanomedicine • Volume I
This makes possible the concept of binding pads—small surfaces
with dimples (concave or convex), each dimple consisting of
precisely-placed nanometer-scale features that are complementary
to specific patches (e.g., epitopes) on the surface of the large target
molecule. (Specificity is lost for portions of the molecule outside
the particular patches.) Each dimple could effectively grasp the side
of the large molecule without having to fully enclose it—a capability
useful in nanorobot foot pads during cell walking and anchoring
(Section 9.4.3), in handles for nanociliary or nanomanipulator
transport functions (Section 9.3.2), and for chemotactic sensing
(Section 4.2.6). (For example, macrophage receptors for LDLs employ
a “pad” consisting of three globular cysteine-rich domains.426) The
large compliance of target protein molecule subunits should prove
curative for any misalignment problems caused by cumulative small
errors in bond lengths across large diamondoid receptor structures.
Rather than using sorting rotors, which become unwieldy when
large molecule binding pockets must be used, the shuttle pump
illustrated schematically in Figure 3.16 may provide reasonably
efficient large molecule sortation and transport. The shuttle pump
consists of a diamondoid tube within which a receptor ring moves
between iris diaphragms at either end (shuttling mechanism not
shown). The receptor ring is constructed as two or more binding
pad segments. For molecule pickup, the ring is pressed together,
forming an annular binding region for the target large molecule,
which binds and is shuttled to the other side. The receptor ring is
then fragmented, destroying binding affinity and unlocking the target
molecule, which escapes via diffusion. The shuttle returns to the
pickup side, the receptor is pressed together again, and the cycle
repeats. A biocompatible solvent environment is maintained
during large-protein manipulation tasks.
Assuming a roughly spherical large molecule and laminar fluid
flow at 1 atm forcing pressure (Section 9.2.7), a 10-nm diameter
molecule moves through a 20-nm long pump (~10-20 kg, ~106 atoms)
in ~10-6 sec at ~0.02 m/sec, consuming ~0.02 pW during transfer.
A 200-nm virus-size target molecule moves through a 400-nm long
pump (~10-17 kg, ~109 atoms) in ~10-2 sec at ~60 microns/sec,
consuming ~10-16 watts during transfer; at ~0.0002 atm, release
time is diffusion limited. The transfer force exerted on a 10-nm
molecule is ~1 pN, ~600 pN on a 200-nm virion; a binding energy
of 400 zJ at a 0.2-nm contact distance gives a binding force of ~2300
pN, sufficient to hold a particle of either size firmly during transport
and release.
J. Soreff points out that as protein size increases, so does the
energy available for local minima in the binding. Desired proteins
may become stuck in incorrect positions, or undesired proteins may
become partially adhered to a receptor. Besides designing to minimize
these possibilities, using a multireceptor cascade with different
combinations of binding patches at each stage should allow complete
exclusion of undesired large-molecule species.
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 4
Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning
4.1 Nanosensor Technology
Medical nanorobots need to acquire information from their
environment to properly execute their assigned tasks. Such
acquisition is achieved using onboard nanoscale sensors,
or nanosensors, of various types. Nanosensors allow for medical
nanodevices to monitor environmental states at three different
operational levels:
1. Internal nanorobot states,
2. Local and global somatic states (inside the human body), and
3. Extrasomatic states (sensory data originating outside the human
body).
The general physical limits to sensory perception are
reviewed by Block810 and Bialek.811
The specific nanosensor technologies required include sensors
to detect chemical substances (Section 4.2), displacement and motion
(Section 4.3), force and mass (Section 4.4), and acoustic (Section
4.5), thermal (Section 4.6), and electromagnetic (Section 4.7)
stimuli. Typical sensor device mass, volume, and sensitivity limits
are summarized in each Section. In vivo bioscanning is briefly described
in Section 4.8, followed by external macrosensing in Section 4.9.
Methods of getting sensors in and out of the body are explained in
Chapter 16, and methods of getting sensor information out of the
body are described in Chapter 7. A discussion of sensor
biocompatibility is deferred to Chapter 15.3234
4.2 Chemical and Molecular Nanosensors
The area of chemical microsensors is well developed, and there
is increasing research interest in nanoscale chemical sensors,438
“chemosensors”1226 and “biosensors”.989 The most common
nanomedical application of chemical sensors will be to measure the
concentration of specific molecules and biopolymers in aqueous
solvent—whether in blood serum, interstitial fluid, or cytosol. This
may be accomplished using ordered arrays of receptors or by using
sorting rotors to directly count molecular populations in known
sample volumes. Spatial and temporal concentration gradient sensing
is also essential in navigation, communications, and in mediating
rapid response to environmental stimuli. Chemotactic sensors may
be used to sample the chemical composition of surfaces.
4.2.1 Broadband Receptor Arrays
One simple broadband concentration sensor, shown schematically10
in Figure 4.1, consists of a graduated series of receptors having
uniformly high specificity but engineered with progressively greater
affinities (successively smaller equilibrium dissociation constants Kd
(molecules/nm3
); Section 3.5.2) for the target molecule, which is
present in the test sample at concentration cligand. Exposure of the
receptor array to the test sample for a time tEQ necessary to reach
diffusion-driven equilibrium gives a probability of receptor occupancy
Pocc ~ 0.91 in a receptor with Kd ~ 0.1cligand, Pocc ~ 0.50 in a receptor
with Kd ~ cligand, and Pocc ~ 0.09 in a receptor with Kd ~ 10cligand.
During each measurement cycle, all steric probes are simultaneously extended into their associated receptor volumes at a time
tEQ after presentation of sample to the array. Probes which reach
full extension register an empty receptor; those which cannot fully
extend register an occupied receptor. After registration, the probes
are retracted and ejection rods are thrust into all receptors (typically
requiring ~1 nanonewton (nN) of force for occupied receptors) to
empty them while the test chamber is flushed clear in preparation
for the next cycle to begin. Ideally, the probe rod pushing into the
binding site should push the bound molecule further into the binding
site to avoid complications that may arise due to competing kinetic
barriers, and ejection rods should push molecules far enough to
ensure that the next resample is independent.
Consider a series of N steric probe units as proposed by Drexler.10
Each probe measures 8 nm x (2.5 nm)2 ~ 50 nm3 and has mass ~ 2
x 10-22 kg. The ratio of the dissociation constants of adjacent units
is κ = Kdi / Kdi+1 > 1, with Kd1 ~ 10-4 molecules/nm3 and KdN
~ 10-13 molecules/nm3 typically in the human body, and so N = 1
+ {log10 (Kd1
/KdN) / log10 (κ)}.
Minimum measurement error occurs when cligand exactly matches
the Kd of a probe unit, that is, when cligand = Kdi (i.e., Poccupiedi = 0.5).
Maximum measurement error occurs when cligand lies exactly midway
between two probes such that Kdi
> cligand > Kdi+1, or, more specifically,
at the geometric midpoint cligand = (Kdi
 Kdi+1)
1/2 = Kdi κ-1/2. In this
case, Eqn. 3.24 becomes

P c
K occupied P i
ligand
d i
1/2 unoccupied i =





 − κ
{Eqn. 4.1}
where Punoccupiedi = 1 - Poccupiedi
. Additionally, sampling error is ~Nm
-1/2
when Nm independent measurements are taken (i.e., Nm measurement
cycles employing all N probe units during each cycle), for Nm >> 1,
establishing an error bound on the probability of receptor occupancy
of Poccupiedi ± Nm-1/2. If two concentrations c1 = Poccupiedi / (1 -
Poccupiedi
) and c2 = (Poccupiedi + Nm-1/2) / (1 - (Poccupiedi + Nm-1/2))
may be distinguished, where Poccupiedi is given by Eqn. 4.1, then the
minimum detectable concentration differential ∆c /c is

∆c/c [c /c ] 1
1 N
11 N 2 1 1
1/2
m
1/2
1/2 1
m
1/2
= − = ( ) +
− ( ) + −
−
− −
− − −
κ
κ
{Eqn. 4.2}
94 Nanomedicine • Volume I
For κ >> 1, Eqn. 4.2 reduces to: (∆c / c)large ~ (1 + κ1/2) / Nm1/2. In
the limit as κ approaches 1 and Nm >> 1, Eqn. 4.2 reduces to:
(∆c / c)small ~ κ-1/2 (∆c / c)large.
For κ = 10 (an N = 10-probe sensor, sufficient to span the entire
Kd = 10-4 to 10-13 molecules/nm3 range using one probe per decade),
∆c / c = 0.94 (94%) at Nm = 100, 0.20 (20%) at Nm = 1000, (0.06)
6% at Nm = 10,000, and 0.006 (0.6%) at Nm = 106 measurement
cycles. Little additional discrimination is obtained by using more
than N ~ 10 probes in the sensor. For Nm = 1000, ∆c / c = 0.89
(89%) at κ = 178 (N = 5 probes), 0.20 (20%) at κ = 10 (N = 10
probes), 0.136 (13.6%) at κ = 1.23 (N = 100 probes), and 0.135
(13.5%) at κ = 1.0021 (N = 10,000 probes). Note that ∆c / c = 0.20
(20%) is equivalent to detecting a pH variation of ~0.08 (e.g.,
10(0.08) - 1 ~ 0.20).
Sensor cycle time ~tEQ may be crudely approximated by the
number of random ligand-receptor encounters (Nencounters ~ 100;
Drexler10) necessary to ensure binding divided by the number of ligands
striking the receptor surface per second,434 or

t ~
N
A c
 MW
2 kT N EQ encounters
ligand
kg
A
1/2 











π (sec/cycle) {Eqn. 4.3}
where A = active receptor cross-sectional area ~0.1 nm2 for small
molecule (MW ~100 gm/mole) receptors to ~10 nm2 for large
molecule (MW ~105 gm/mole) receptors; cligand = 10-2 nm-3 for the
most common molecules to 10-12 nm-3 for rare molecules in the
human body; MWkg = target ligand molecular weight in kg/mole,
k = 0.01381 zJ/K (Boltzmann constant), T = 310 K (human body
temperature), and NA = 6.023 x 1023 molecules/mole (Avogadro’s
number).
For common small molecules, tEQ ~10-6 sec; for common large
molecules, tEQ ~0.2 x 10-6 sec, but a sample chamber ~(25 nm)3 in
size is diffusion-limited to a minimum tEQ ~ 10-5 sec for cligand  10-4
nm-3. For the rarest small molecules in the human body, tEQ ~ 800 sec,
~200 sec for rare large molecules, and a larger chamber may also be
required. Preconcentration of the test sample by
dehydration using sorting rotors (Section 3.4.2) to rapidly remove
water from the sample chamber reduces tEQ to 10-40 sec for very
rare molecules.
Steric probes using a driving force10 of ~100 pN, over 2 nm of
motion per cycle require 200 zJ/measurement. If 1000 measurement
cycles of a 10-probe sensor suffice to determine concentration to ~2
significant figures, this information costs ~0.002 pJ to acquire, a
power consumption of from ~10 pW for large common molecules
to ~10-9 pW (~0.6 kT/sec) for small rare molecules while the sensor
is working. Power dissipation may run up to ~10 times higher,
depending upon the number of occupied receptors that must be
cleared via ejection rods during each cycle.
4.2.2 Narrowband Receptor Arrays
If the concentration of the target ligand varies only slightly within
known limits, similar results may be obtained using a narrowband
sensor that employs a repeating array of a single receptor type tuned
to the maximum expected concentration cmax of the target ligand
(Fig. 4.2). If the sensor consists of Nr receptors, choosing Kd  cmax
Nr
-1 / (1 - Nr
-1) ensures that all receptors are occupied at c = cmax,
thus avoiding array saturation at concentrations below cmax. At
minimum sensitivity, Kd ~ cmin (1 - Nr
-1) / Nr
-1, and so (1 + (∆c / c))
= (cmax / cmin)
(Nr
-1) for the entire array. Thus the minimum detectable
concentration differential ∆c / c for the array is

∆c/c N 1 1 r
2/Nr = ( ) − − ( ) {Eqn. 4.4}
If A = receptor unit active area (~50 nm2
), L = receptor unit
length (~10 nm), and receptor arrays are packed in parallel sheets
with separation ∆x (~10 nm, for small-molecule diffusion in ~10-6
sec) to allow sample access, sensor volume Vs = AL Nr (1 + (∆x / L))
and sensor scale ~ Vs
1/3. Thus a sensor with Nr = 100 receptor units
achieves ∆c / c = 0.10 (10%) with a (46 nm)3 sensor; Nr = 1400
receptor units achieves ∆c / c = 0.01 (1%) with a (112 nm)3 sensor.
A dedicated micron-scale nanodevice employing a (1.44 micron)3
sensor array having 3 million receptor cells could at best distinguish
0.001% concentration differentials in ~ 3 sec (from Eqn. 4.6) for
common molecules like serum glucose.
The ion channel switch (ICS) biosensor (aka. the “Australian
sensor”) can detect small-molecule concentrations as low as ~10-14
nm-3 in a ~600 sec measurement time.3039,3040
4.2.3 Counting Rotors
Concentration may be determined by varying exposure time to
the sample. One energy-efficient design (Fig. 4.3) uses an input
sorting rotor running at varying speeds (according to target
concentration) synchronized with a counting rotor (linked by rods
and ratchets to a data storage register device) to assay the number of
molecules of the desired type that are present in a known volume of
fluid. The counting rotor uses a steric probe, moved up and down
in synchrony with the arrival of a binding site under the test probe,
to count the number of molecules transferred by the sorting rotor.
The fluid sample is drawn from the environment into a 4000 nm3
reservoir (Lreservoir ~ 16 nm) with the equivalent of 104 refills/sec on
a flow-through basis, using paddlewheel pumps or reciprocating
Fig. 4.1. Schematic of broadband chemical concentration sensor array
using 5 receptor units with steric probes.
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 95
pistons (Section 9.2.7; not shown) operated slowly enough to avoid
damaging molecules in the sample volume. This sensor, which
measures 45 nm x 45 nm x 10 nm comprising ~500,000 atoms
(~10-20 kg), should count N ~ 104 - 105 molecules/sec of small
common molecules present at typical human serum concentrations
of 10-3 - 10-2 nm-3, such as glucose, with the rotor spinning at ~1%
of normal speed (Section 3.4.2). Clogging of intake apertures in
vivo is addressed in Sections 3.3.1 and 9.2.3, and in Chapter 15.
For rare molecules with c ~ 10-11 nm-3, the count rate for a single
sensing rotor falls to N ~ 10-4 molecules/sec. However, a (340 nm)3
reservoir (a ~104 larger chamber volume) serviced by a bank of 104
rotors (4 x 10-18 kg additional mass) improves the count rate for
rare molecules to N ~ 1 molecule/sec; that is,

N ~ ˙ 2500 c L ligand reservoir
3 (molecules/sec) {Eqn. 4.5}
Sample preconcentration may allow further improvement by a
factor of up to 10-100. Energy requirements are comparable to those
for sorting rotors (Section 3.4.2) except for the need to retrieve ~all
target molecules from a known sample volume, which slows the
sorting process, requiring ~10 zJ/count for common molecules and
~100 zJ/count for the rarest molecules in the human body.
Large-molecule concentrations may be measured using a shuttle
pump (Section 3.5.9) and a counting device.
4.2.4 Chemical Assay
It may also be useful to design a sensor that is capable of detecting as
many different chemical species as possible, in contrast to detecting
the precise concentration of a single species, for use in
chemomessaging (Section 7.4.2.4), chemonavigation (Section 8.4.3),
cellular diagnosis (Chapter 21), and other in vivo assay work.
Counting rotors may be used for this purpose. Each 12-receptor
sorting rotor/counting rotor pair has a minimum 400 nm3 volume.10
Allowing an additional ~800 nm3 per pair to account for power,
control, mechanical attachments and housings, which includes ~300
nm3 per pair for sample chamber volume and sample access,
requires ~100 nm3 per receptor, roughly the same as for the steric
probe units described in Section 4.2.1. A dedicated 1 micron3 chemical
assay nanorobot, which includes ~0.25 micron3 sample volume, with
~107 pairs (receptors) could thus continuously scan for as many as
~107 different chemical species, counting N ~ 1 large molecule/
sec at concentrations of cligand ~ 10-10 molecules/nm3
.
4.2.5 Chemical Nanosensor Theoretical Limits
Berg and Purcell337 estimated that an ideal concentration sensor,
limited only by diffusion constraints and drawing through a spherical
boundary surface of radius rs, provides a minimum detectable
concentration differential ∆c / c of
∆c / c = (1.61 ∆t D c rs)
-1/2 {Eqn. 4.6}
where ∆t = time (sec), D is diffusion coefficient ~10-9 m2
/sec for
small molecules (Table 3.3), and c = concentration (molecules/m3
).
Using a sample chamber with rs = 10 nm, a concentration of c =
3 x 10-3 nm-3 for serum glucose could be measured with 1%
uncertainty in ∆t ~ 260 microsec, or with 0.01% uncertainty in
2.6 sec. A dedicated micron-scale nanodevice using a 10-sec
sampling time could at best distinguish a 0.0005% concentration
differential for small common molecules like serum glucose but only
a 27% concentration differential for large rare serum molecules like
somatotropin.
Fig. 4.2. Schematic of narrowband chemical concentration nanosensor array using receptors of a single type.
Fig. 4.3. Chemical concentration sensor using counting rotors.
96 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Berg and Purcell337 also found that the capture of small molecules
at nanorobot surfaces can be surprisingly efficient. Specifically, for
a spherical nanodevice of radius R, across whose surface are uniformly
distributed Nr receptor spots of radius rr, the maximum diffusion
current absorbed by the receptor array, Jarray, is

J J N r
N r R array r r
r r
= +


 

 π
{Eqn. 4.7}
where J = maximum diffusive intake current, given by Eqn. 3.4. For
rr = 1 nm and R = 1 micron, the Jarray is fully 50% of J using only Nr
= 3100 surface receptors, which occupy a mere 0.1% of the total
device surface area.
For a purely sensory spherical nanodevice, a uniform distribution
of a relatively small number of chemoreceptors confers optimal
sensitivity. However, in applications where sensors (which attract
and then release) are in competition with pumps (which strongly
attract and then remove) for the same target molecules at the
nanodevice surface, greater sensing efficiency may be achieved by
clustering the sensors, as in a “nose” organ.437
Proteins may be modified as they age within biological cells. For
instance, under steady state conditions, ~10% of protein molecules
may exhibit carbonyl (oxidation) modifications,2138 glycosylation
(non-enzymatic), and dysfunctional proteins may be ubiquitinized
(Chapter 13) and phosphorylated under enzyme control. Heat shock
also modifies proteins. Chemosensor receptors must be carefully
designed to accommodate changes in target ligand structures or
sites that are likely to be subject to such alterations.
4.2.6 Spatial Concentration Gradients
Medical nanodevices can detect both extremely steep and
extremely shallow spatial concentration gradients. For example, a
receptor array sensor (Section 4.2.1) consisting of 10 steric probe
units has a total volume of ~1000 nm3 including its prorated share
of drive systems, housings, etc. In just a few measurement cycles,
adjacent sensors can detect a maximum concentration change from
10-2 nm-3 to 10-11 nm-3 across a mean nanosensor separation of 10
nm on a nanodevice surface, a steep chemical spatial gradient of
~1010% per nanometer. J. Soreff points out that maintaining a steep
concentration gradient of a freely diffusing species implies a power
dissipation of ~kT per molecule per time to diffuse a concentrationhalving distance. For a common, small, tethered molecule with cligand
~ 3 x 10-3 molecules/nm3 that diffuses ~1 nm in tdiff ~ 1 nanosec,
implied power density Dmol ~ kT cligand / tdiff ~ 1013 watts/m3
, a
power density that might possibly be encountered in the vicinity
of chemoelectric transducers (Section 6.3.4.5). (Such high power
densities never occur on macroscale dimensions, and heat rapidly
diffuses at nanoscale dimensions; Sections 4.6.1.)
Similarly, counting rotor sensors (Section 4.2.3) for small common
serum molecules like glucose deployed at opposite ends of a 1-micron
nanodevice can detect a concentration differential of ~10-4 over a
~1 sec measurement period, a shallow chemical spatial gradient of
only ~10-5 % per nanometer. Even lower gradients may be detected
by communication (Chapter 7) between physically separated
cooperating nanodevices.
4.2.7 Temporal Concentration Gradients
Koshland and Macnab435 have shown that bacteria possess a
mechanism for sensing small temporal concentration gradients. A
bacterium detects a spatial gradient of attractant not by comparing
the concentration at its head and tail, but rather by traveling through
space and comparing its observations over time. E. coli can measure
a ~0.01% gradient436 during the time it travels one body length (~2
microns) at top speed (20-40 microns/sec), a minimum temporal
gradient of 0.1% per second. This appears very efficient, since the
counting rotor sensor proposed in Section 4.2.3 is not much better,
achieving ~0.01% per second. As for peak gradients, the 10-probe
receptor array sensor described in Section 4.2.1 can detect a maximum
concentration change (e.g., from an already-known rare concentration)
in ~10-4 sec, a peak temporal gradient of ~1015 % per second.
4.2.8 Chemotactic Sensor Pads
Besides concentration sensing, chemical sensors may be used to
determine the chemical characteristics of surfaces. A binding pad
coated with an array of reversible, possibly reconfigurable, artificial
receptors (Section 3.5.9) may be pressed against test surfaces such
as cell membranes, or the perimeters of very large molecules, in
order to detect the presence of specific chemical ligands. If pad
receptor specificity is high for the target ligand, then the degree of
pad “stickiness” to the test surface is a good measure of the population
of target ligands on that surface. Probing two-dimensional surfaces
with receptors may be constrained by orientation effects, since binding
may require a specific relative orientation of ligand and receptor.
Compliant pad receptors can reduce this problem but may impair
lateral resolution—there is a three-way tradeoff among angular
tolerance, lateral resolution, and multioriented multicopy receptors.
A physical contact sensor prevents confusion of surface-bound and
free-solvated ligands of the same species. The selective and reversible stickiness of such pads can also be exploited for locomotion
(Section 9.4.3.1).
Molecular adhesion experiments in chemical force microscopy440,1066
and interfacial force microscopy441 using AFM probes with
functionalized tips (Section 2.3.3) typically detect maximum adhesive
noncovalent force differentials of 40-160 piconewton (pN)/ligand
for competing ligands at a peak-force distance of ~0.2 nm. Forces
>10 pN are readily measured by nanosensors (Section 4.4.1), so
binding pad sensors should give an exact count of the number of
target ligands present per unit area of test surface if (receptor areal
number density) > (ligand areal number density) > (1 ligand / pad
area), and if contact time is adequate. Receptors for many different
ligands can be mounted on moving rotors or belts, or employed as
interchangeable tool tips (Section 9.3.2), thus allowing a single sensor
pad to reconfigure its specificity or sensitivity under external control.
4.2.9 Receptor Sensors
Ligand mimics may also be used to allow a medical nanodevice
to detect a particular receptor in its environment. Each such “receptor
sensor” is a protruding physical structure that mimics all or part of
the electrosteric structure of the ligand to which the target receptor
has maximum specificity. For example, probes consisting of artificial
structures that simulate antigen peptides (8-15 amino acids long)
bound in an MHC-like structure439 (Section 8.5.2.1) could be used
to sense the presence of specific T-cell receptors.
Sensing pads displaying ligand mimic structures are brought into
contact with the test surface. Any target receptors present will bind
to a mimic structure, thus may be counted as the sensor sweeps
slowly across the surface. Immediately after recognition has occurred,
the mimic structure may be reversibly fragmented, destroying
receptor/mimic affinity and allowing the receptor to release the
mimic. Mimics are mounted on the sensor pad with an appropriately
elastic compliance to prevent structure detachment during a
measurement scan.
Receptor sensing is most useful in detecting receptors for large
molecules. In the case of receptors for small molecules, there may
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 97
sometimes be insufficient space in the target molecular volume to
match the surface electrosteric structure, to accommodate ligand
fragmentation control rods or cables, or to build internal boundaries
sufficient to permit ligand fragmentation without creating undesirable
reactive species. Some of these problems with small-molecule
receptors may be partially overcome by employing an annular
repulsive ring through which a mimic ligand may be forcibly retracted
without fragmentation, but receptor orientation effects will present
additional constraints.
4.3 Displacement and Motion Sensors
The ability to precisely measure position and displacement,
velocity and acceleration, rotation and orientation are essential
requirements for nanoscale locomotion, physical manipulation, and
navigation. A comprehensive analysis is beyond the scope of this
book, but the following approximations should prove useful in
nanomedical design.
4.3.1 Displacement Sensors
Diamondoid parts may contain features, or be positioned, in
picometer (1 pm = 10-12 m) steps, much smaller than the unavoidable
RMS thermal vibrations (Section 3.5.6). The nanomanipulator robot
arm described in Section 9.3.1.4 may be moved in picometer
increments, and the RMS thermal longitudinal displacements at
the tip of a 20-nm long, 10-nm wide diamondoid lever is ~1 pm.10
Displacement sensitivity of 10 pm is routinely achieved in STMs. It
is claimed this can be improved down to the ~1 pm level;433 STM
resolution of 2 pm has been demonstrated experimentally.1260 A
C60 molecule used as the active element in an electromechanical
amplifier transmits ~100 times more electrical current when physically
compressed by 100 pm,561 suggesting a minimum deformation
detection limit of a few picometers. (A strain gauge and a vibration
sensor using a (17,0) carbon nanotube (~2000 atoms) has been
proposed.2908)
Thermally-induced positional uncertainty in the displacement
of nanoscale components is approximated10 by the classical value
∆x~ (kT / ks)
1/2 {Eqn. 4.8}
where T is temperature (K) and ks is the Hooke’s law spring constant,
or restoring force stiffness (N/m). At 310 K, this classical
approximation is accurate to within 10% of the quantum
mechanical treatment for harmonic oscillators with RMS displacements
∆x  10 pm.10 Spring stiffness ks is ~0.1 N/m for nonbonded
(noncovalent) interatomic interactions, ~30 N/m for covalent bond
angle bending, ~400 N/m for covalent bond stretching, and ~1000
N/m for solid 1 nm3 diamondoid blocks.10 At 310 K, springs of
such stiffness produce minimum displacement uncertainties of 200
pm, 10 pm, 3 pm and 2 pm, respectively.
The log ratio of detection energy to noise energy, the signal/
noise ratio (SNR), for a displacement sensor is derived from the
harmonic potential (1/2) ks x2
 as

SNR ~ ln signal energy
noise energy ~ ln k x
2 kT
s
2 

 

 





∆ {Eqn. 4.9}
Assuming a very stiff ks = 600 N/m, a minimal SNR = 1 gives a
minimum detectable displacement of 6 pm, or 10 pm at a more
reasonable SNR = 2 (20 dB). The conservative conclusion is that
∆xmin ~ 10 pm displacements should be reliably detectable by medical
nanosensors in vivo, in a measurement time tmeas ~ 10-9 sec (Section
4.3.2). This compares favorably with the stereocilia of the inner ear,
which can only detect 100 pm displacements in 10-5 sec.446
4.3.2 Velocity and Flow Rate Sensors
Typical thermal velocities of nanoscale diamondoid components
at 310 K, from Eqn. 3.3, are ~60 m/sec for 1 nm3 objects, ~2 m/sec
for (10 nm)3 objects, 0.06 m/sec for (100 nm)3 objects, and 0.02
m/sec for 1 micron3
 objects. These thermal motions are in degrees
of freedom whose range of motion is largely confined, by design, to
sub-nanometer distances (Section 4.3.1) within nanoscale measuring
devices. However, objects of nanomedical interest may have
velocities ranging from ~10-9 m/sec (Section 9.4.4.2) to ~103 m/sec
(e.g., the speed of sound in water), and may include biological
elements in the environment or internal machine components. Thus
it is useful to explore the fundamental limitations involved in
measuring the full range of this physical variable.
There are at least two simple ways to determine a velocity. First,
velocity may be measured by transferring the kinetic energy of a
moving object or fluid volume to a sensor element. The movement
of the sensor element is then clocked as it traverses a known distance.
Second, and more efficiently, the passage of the moving object may
sequentially trip two latches located a known distance apart, again
revealing the moving object’s velocity; alternatively, detecting the
presence or absence of a protruding feature on a passing body using
probe rods (e.g., Fig. 4.5) can determine velocity without any
requirement for large kinetic energy transfers. The need for physical
gating movements by sensor components and computational registershift operations using diamondoid rods moving at ~GHz clocking
speeds10 suggests a conservative minimum stable sensor cycle time
of ~10-9 sec (Section 10.1).
The two principal restrictions on the maximum detectable
velocity vmax are the maximum linear dimension of the sensor element,
or Lsensor, and the minimum event time that may be accurately
discriminated, or ∆tmin. For a sensor element with thermal noise
energy ∆E ~ 10 kT = 43 zJ at 310 K, the quantum mechanical limit
is ∆tmin   / (2 ∆E) ~ 10-15 sec. ∆tmin is also limited by the thermal
variation in length of the individual latches. If the minimum detectable
latch displacement is ∆x ~ 10 pm (Section 4.3.1), and the maximum
speed of latch displacement is approximately the speed of sound in
the latch material (e.g., vsound ~ 17,300 m/sec for diamond), then ∆t ~
∆x / vsound ~ 10-15 sec, near the quantum mechanical limit. ∆t is
further restricted by the minimum detectable phase variance
between latches located at either end of the sensor. An
acoustically-transmitted clock pulse emitted from a centrally-located
source that is ∆x closer to one of the two latches can discriminate a
phase variance of  ∆x / Lsensor ~ 10-5 taking Lsensor ~ 1 micron, so
the minimum discriminable time is again ∆tmin ~ 10-5 Lsensor / vsound
~ 10-15 sec; hence vmax ~ Lsensor / ∆tmin ~ 109 m/sec ~ c (= 3 x 108 m/
sec, the speed of light).
However, unlike photons, physical objects moving in an aqueous
medium are normally limited to the speed of sound in that
medium,* e.g., vsound ~ 1500 m/sec in water at 310 K (Table 6.7). If
vmax is taken as ~103 m/sec, then for a sensor of size Lsensor ~ 1
micron the required time discrimination is only ∆tmin ~ Lsensor /
vmax ~ 10-9 sec.
The minimum detectable velocity vmin is limited by the
minimum measurable linear displacement ∆x ~ 10 pm and the
limits of our patience in making the measurement. For a maximum
measurement time of tmeas ~ 1 sec, vmin ~ ∆x / tmeas ~ 0.01 nm/sec
in vacuo. In a nanomedically-relevant aqueous medium, the systematic
*Crystal dislocations,3042 high-speed bullets, detonation waves and other nanomedically-relevant phenomena can exceed the local speed of sound, but supersonic operations
are hardly conservative and a turbulent medium adds additional sources of error to the measurement.
98 Nanomedicine • Volume I
motion of a free-floating (untethered) object of radius R is masked
by added Brownian noise as defined in Eqn 3.1, giving the limiting
vbrownian = ∆X / τ  260 nm/sec for R = 10 micron and vbrownian
2.6 micron/sec for R = 100 nm, where τ = tmeas = 1 sec. The thermal
motions of tethered objects moving along surfaces (e.g., vesicles
transported along microtubules by kinesin motors; Section 9.4.6)
are more restricted, hence Brownian velocity masking is reduced.
Modest accuracy may be achieved using acoustic reflection in a
Doppler velocimeter. Employing acoustic waves of frequency ν, the
minimum measurable velocity change ∆v = vsound / (ν tmeas) = 150
microns/sec in an aqueous medium at 310 K with vsound = 1500 m/sec,
ν ~ 10 MHz, and tmeas = 1 sec, corresponding to the shifted frequency
ν (1 + (∆v / vsound)) having enough time to make one extra cycle
during tmeas. Even at such long wavelengths (~150 microns),
significant backscattering of ultrasound from ~7.82-micron red cells
is observed experimentally.3044
Velocity sensors may also be used to estimate volumetric flow
rates in fluidic channels442 and blood vessels443 by measuring the
speed at which fluid passes a nanodevice resting on the vessel wall.
The parabolic velocity profile of v is a function of radial distance r
from the center of a cylindrical vessel of radius R for Hagen-Poiseuille
flow361 (Section 9.2.5):

v RrP
4 L
2 2
v
= ( ) − ∆
η
{Eqn. 4.10}
where absolute viscosity η = 1.1 centipoise (1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec) for
plasma at 310 K and ∆P is the pressure change along the length of
a vessel of length Lv. A 1-micron nanodevice obtains measurements
of v at various distances from the vessel wall, then fits these data to
Eqn. 4.10 to find the choice of R that minimizes the variation in
estimated ∆P / Lv, which should be roughly constant under
nonaccelerative conditions. Once R is determined, ∆P / Lv is known
as well as the cross-sectional area (π R2
) of the vessel lumen, and a
simple integration of the radial velocity distribution provides the
flow rate in m3
/sec. Unfortunately, the usefulness of this technique
is limited by boundary layer effects (Section 9.4.2.6).
4.3.3 Acceleration Sensors
Accelerations inside nanoscale devices are often measured in the
trillions of g’s (g = 9.81 m/sec2
). For example, an L = 1 nm diamondoid
block (m = 3.5 x 10-24 kg) with thermal energy ~kT experiences
random thermal accelerations of atherm ~ kT / g m L = 1011 g’s; a 10-nm
logic rod with vibrational energy ~kT experiences ~1012 g
oscillations; a 200-nm wide hoop spinning axially with 1000 m/sec
rim speed has rotational acceleration of a ~ 1012 g’s.
4.3.3.1 Box-Spring Accelerometers
As one member of a class of devices, a simple nanoscale omnidirectional accelerometer is conceptualized as a reaction mass
suspended by three pairs of reaction springs (one pair per orthogonal
directional axis) with each spring connected to the walls of an
evacuated box (Fig. 4.4). Acceleration in any direction extends some
springs and compresses others, which is measured by force or
displacement sensors attached to each spring. The signal/noise ratio
for this sensor is

SNR ln
E
E ln m a
2 kT k
spring
noise
2 2
s
= 




 = 




 {Eqn. 4.11}
For a sensor mass m = 10-17 kg (~78 nm-wide platinum* or
~140 nm-wide diamond cube) suspended with ks = 1 N/m floppy
springs at T = 310 K, the minimum detectable acceleration amin =
1.6 x 106 g’s for SNR = 1 and 2.6 x 106 g’s for SNR = 2 (undamped
resonant acceleration ~ L ks/m ~ 109 g’s for L=100 nm). Undamped
resonance frequency ωres = (ks/m)1/2 = 3 x 108 radians/sec, which is
measurable (Section 4.3.4.3).
Sensor mass exchanges reciprocally with acceleration sensitivity
in Eqn. 4.11, so the lower limit even for a dedicated micron-scale
platinum-core box-spring accelerometer is amin ~1000 g’s at SNR ~ 2
(undamped resonant acceleration ~ 106 g’s for L = 2 microns). The
maximum detectable acceleration requires m ~ 10-23 kg (~1.4 nm
diamond cube) and ks ~ 1000 N/m, giving amax ~5 x 1013 g’s at
SNR = 1.
If the accelerometer depicted in Figure 4.4 is installed near the
center of mass of a nanorobot, the sensor may avoid confusing
centrifugal and translation forces. Otherwise, information from
multiple sensors must be combined to obtain an unambiguous
measurement. Multiple measurements can improve the SNR for
constant accelerations of long duration.
In 1998, ~100-nm vibrating-beam silicon accelerometers were
under development by Analog Devices and Daimler-Benz. Tunneling
accelerometers had been fabricated with ~10–6 g resolution at a 350
Hz bandwidth or ~10-8 g/Hz1/2.
3041 Silicon-based capacitive accelerometers (5-1000 g full scale) manufactured by Silicon Designs
(Issaquah, WA) were widely used in automotive airbag safety systems;
in 1998, Motorola shipped its ten-millionth accelerometer, and the
global market for automotive silicon accelerometers was expected
to reach $463 million by 2002.
*Platinum is probably the ideal choice for medical nanodevice components requiring maximum density. Depleted uranium, a relatively abundant element, is more common
in macroscale nonmedical devices. However, pure U238 has a density of 19,050 kg/m3
, somewhat lower than the density of Pt (21,450 kg/m3
) or even gold (19,320 kg/m3
).
Uranium and its compounds are highly toxic, and finely divided (e.g., micron-scale) uranium metal is pyrophoric (spontaneously combustible) in air. By comparison, Pt metal
is almost completely inert in air and in the body, thus is nontoxic, and is mechanically ~50 times stronger than gold (Table 9.3). Only two elements have higher density than
Pt: Os (22,480 kg/m3
) and Ir (22,420 kg/m3
). Osmium is brittle even at high temperatures and the powdered metal oxidizes in air, giving off osmium tetroxide which has
a strong smell and is highly toxic (as little as 100 nanograms per m3 of air causes lung congestion, skin and eye damage). Iridium metal is also very brittle and, like osmium,
is at least five times less abundant than Pt.691,763
Fig. 4.4. Schematic of box-spring omnidirectional accelerometer.
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 99
4.3.3.2 Displacement Accelerometers
Formed elements in the human bloodstream (e.g., red cells, white
cells, platelets) typically are buffeted by much smaller accelerations.
For example at 310 K, instantaneous random thermal accelerations
of athermal ~ 500 g’s are experienced by a 0.2-micron virus particle,
~0.05 g’s by a 2-micron platelet, ~10-4 g’s by a 10-micron neutrophil—
and ~0.4 g’s by a 1 micron3 spherical nanorobot. Force-based sensors
cannot easily detect such low accelerations, since the smaller the
sensor, the larger the amin for a given SNR (Eqn. 4.11). An alternative
approach uses displacement sensors to determine an object’s velocity
twice in rapid sequence, allowing acceleration to be computed from
the difference.
Consider a constantly accelerating object that triggers three
clocking latches at positions x1, x2, and x3, in sequence. Time and
position of the object are measured as (x1, t1), (x2, t2), and (x3, t3).
The measured constant acceleration is then given by


a v v
t t 32 21
32 21
= −
− ( / m sec ) 2 {Eqn. 4.12}
where v32 = (x3 - x2) / (t3 - t2), v21 = (x2 - x1) / (t2 - t1), t32 = (t3 + t2) / 2
and t21 = (t2 + t1) / 2. If adjacent latches are an equal distance xlatch
apart so that xlatch = (x3 - x2) = (x2 - x1), and taking t1 = 0, then Eqn.
4.12 reduces to

a 2 x 2t t
t t t t
latch 2 3
32 3 2
= ( ) −
( ) − (m/sec2
) {Eqn. 4.13}
Assume that a slowly accelerating external object passes three
clocking latches that are fixed to the exterior of a nanorobot of radius
R. Measurements of the object’s velocity incur an unavoidable error
due to nanorobot thermal motion. The object is observed to pass
between latch pairs during a measurement time ~tmeas. During this
same interval, from Eqn. 3.1 the nanorobot translates a distance
∆X = (kT tmeas/ 3 π η R)1/2, incurring a maximum velocity measurement error of ~∆X / tmeas, and thus from Eqn. 4.12 a maximum
acceleration measurement error of ~2 ∆X / tmeas2 if (t3 - t2) ~ (t2 - t1)
~ tmeas. Thus the minimum detectable acceleration is

a ~ 4 kT
3 R t min
meas
3
1/2
π η





 (m/sec2
) {Eqn. 4.14}
Taking T = 310 K, η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec and R = 1 micron,
then amin ~ 10-7 g’s for tmeas = 1 sec; amin ~ 0.004 g’s for a more
reasonable tmeas = 10-3 sec measurement time in the in vivo environment.
Onboard reference oscillators with the requisite accuracy are
described in Section 10.1.
4.3.3.3 Fluid Acceleration Sensors
Biological fluid accelerations may also be inferred from
measurements of spatial pressure gradients. Ignoring frictional and
gravitational forces and assuming laminar flow, fluid acceleration
afluid is given by

a P
x fluid = − ∆
ρ ∆ (m/sec2
) {Eqn. 4.15}
where ρ = fluid density (e.g., blood plasma is an almost incompressible
Newtonian fluid, with ρ ~ 1025 kg/m3 at 310 K) and ∆P is the
measured change in pressure over a distance ∆x. The mitral and
aortic valves in the heart (∆P / ∆x ~ 105 N/m3
, afluid ~ 10 g’s,474 ∆x ~
a few cm), as well as valves in the veins and lymphatics, operate as
bistable analog decelerometers employing this principle.444 Micronscale medical nanorobots traveling across blood vessel surfaces could
use pressure sensors capable of 10-6 atm resolution (Section 4.5.1)
to infer local blood flow accelerations to an accuracy of ± 0.01 g
from sequential measurements taken 1 mm apart.
4.3.3.4 Pivoted Gyroscopic Accelerometers
Consider a cylindrical gyroscope spinning at an angular velocity
ω (radians/sec), with radius r and thickness h, whose center of gravity
lies a distance Lp from a frictionless pivot point along the rotational
axis. The pivot point defines the center of a spherical sensor grid of
radius R ≥ (r2
 + 4h2
)
1/2 having distinguishable grid elements located a
distance ∆x ~ 1 nm apart. Under uniform acceleration a, the gyroscope precesses around its spin axis at an angular velocity ωp = 2 a
Lp / ω r2 = ∆x / R tmeas, where tmeas is measurement duration. Hence
the minimum detectable acceleration is

a x r
2 L R t min
2
p meas
= ∆ ω (m/sec2
) {Eqn. 4.16}
by comparing precessional motion against the grid.
In choosing an ω with which to measure amin, there is an upper and
a lower limit. The upper bound is the bursting strength condition

ω ω
σ = < 



 max 
w
2
1/2
2
ρ r (rad/sec) {Eqn. 4.17}
where σw is a safe working stress = 1010 N/m2 (~0.2 tensile strength)
for diamond10 and ρ is the density of the gyroscope material (~3510
kg/m3 for diamond). The lower bound is the minimum spin angular
velocity below which the pivoted gyroscope cannot spin stably
about the vertical axis and begins to wobble,448 thus ruining the
measurement. The lower bound is given by

ω ω
π ρ = =
+ 

 

 











min
min p
2 2
6
4 a L r 1
3
h
 h r
1 2/
{Eqn. 4.18}
If ωmax / ωmin > 1, then nonwobbling spin velocities are available
below the bursting speed of the gyroscope cylinder. Since this ratio
scales with R, there is a minimum sensor size Rmin below which no
useful spin velocities are available. Combining Eqns. 4.16 and 4.18
and solving the quadratic in ω gives

R
2 x r 1
3
h
 h t r 2 min
2 2
meas
3
w
1/2 =
+ 

 


( )
∆
π σρ
{Eqn. 4.19}
For tmeas = 10-3 sec, Rmin  69 microns (optimum r = 48 microns,
h = 25 microns); for tmeas = 1 sec, Rmin  6.9 microns (optimum r
= 4.8 microns, h = 2.5 microns). Thus it appears that pivoted gyroscopic accelerometers likely will be employed only in devices >> 10
microns in size (but see Section 4.3.4.1). Microscale gyroscopes
implemented in silicon have been discussed by Greiff1383 and others.447
4.3.3.5 Accelerative Onset
Aside from pure acceleration, the rate of accelerative onset—
sometimes called jolt, surge, or jerk—can produce additional
damaging effects on macroscale mechanical and biological structures.
For example, the effects of accelerative onset (a) on the human body
were studied by Col. John Paul Stapp1714 in a series of aggressive
rocket sled experiments conducted during the 1950s.1714-1716 For
100 Nanomedicine • Volume I
human subjects, cardiovascular shock was entirely absent for a 
500-600 g/sec but began to appear at a  1100-1400 g/sec, at 1-40
g accelerations. Human tolerance to linear decelerative force is determined both by rate of onset and peak acceleration; the endurance
limit for well-restrained healthy young males has been given as 500
g/sec and 50 g for 0.2 sec durations.1717
By 1998, the effects of accelerative onset on nanomechanical
structures had not been extensively studied, but similar limits might
apply to nanomachines. For example, a diamond rod of length Lrod
= 1 micron, cross-sectional area Srod = 0.01 micron2
, mass mrod =
3.5 x 10-17 kg, and working strength Wrod ~ 5 x 1010 N/m2
 (Table
9.3) fails when subjected to a static acceleration afail  Wrod Srod /
mrod ~ 1012 g. But accelerative shocks can produce dynamic
amplification in the response spectrum of elastic systems. Dynamic
stress rises to a peak of roughly twice the corresponding static value
when apeak  4 νres amax for a trapezoidal pulse shape, where νres is
the frequency of natural vibration of the system,363 because the
stresses from the free oscillations of the system, induced by the
changes in the acceleration of the system, can add to the static stresses
from the acceleration, with damage done by the total stress. Taking
ks ~ 1 N/m for the rod described above, then νres ~ 30 MHz (Section
4.3.3.1) and apeak ~ 1020 g/sec at amax ~ 1012 g. For comparison, the
teragravity nanocentrifuge (Section 3.2.5) has mass m ~ 10-17 kg
and is spun up to amax = 5 x 1011 g’s in 10-6 sec, giving a  5 x
1017 g/sec << apeak.
4.3.4 Angular Displacement
There are circumstances in which it is necessary for a medical
nanodevice to measure, establish or maintain a preferred orientation,
as for example nanorobots with a clearly defined “top” and “bottom” or
nanodevices performing lengthy intracellular operations requiring
precision stationkeeping. Measurement of rotation rates may also
be required.
4.3.4.1 Gimballed Nanogyroscopes
Pivoted gyroscopes of the type described in Section 4.3.3.4 are
impractical for orientational sensing in all but the largest medical
nanodevices. Setting ωmax (Eqn. 4.17) equal to ωmin (Eqn. 4.18),
taking amin = g = 9.81 m/sec2 (gravitational acceleration), and
optimizing for minimum sensor size gives a critical nonwobbling
nonbursting spin velocity ωcrit ~ 6.8 x 107 radians/sec at a minimum
device radius of ~35 microns. If a pivoted gyroscope is smaller than
this minimum radius, then spinning it slower than ωcrit causes the
gyro to tumble helplessly, while spinning it faster than ωcrit tears the
gyro apart.
However, a triaxially gimballed nanogyroscope may be regarded
as having its pivot point near its center of mass, so Lp becomes very
small and ωmin becomes very slow, making nanogyroscopes feasible
in medical nanorobots. Taking h = 1 micron, r = 0.5 micron, ρ =
3510 kg/m3 and amin = g in Eqn. 4.18, then if the gimbals are aligned
such that Lp = 1 nm between the pivot point and the effective center of
gravity along the rotation axis, then ωmin ~ 400 rad/sec. If gimbal
tolerances are improved to Lp = 0.1 nm, then ωmin ~ 125 rad/sec.
How stable is a nanogyroscopic orientation standard? There are
two principal considerations.
First, Brownian thermal rotation in all three angular degrees of
freedom (θ, ϕ and ψ) gives rise to a small nutation around the
nanogyroscopic precession axis of magnitude ∆θnutate ~ pϕ / pψ, where
pϕ and pψ are angular momenta of the gyro.448 The minimum value
for pϕ is approximated by (1/2) kT ~ (1/2) pϕ
2 / I1, where I1 =
(1/4) m r2 + (1/12) m h2
, the moment of inertia around ϕ, and m =
π r2 h ρ. The maximum value for pψ is given by the burst-strength
condition ω < ωmax (Eqn. 4.17) as pψ ~ I3 ω, where I3 = (1/2) m r2
,
the moment of inertia around ψ. Hence:

∆θ
π σ nutate
2 2
w
4
1/2
~
kT r 1
3
h
2 h r (radians)
+ 

 

 











{Eqn. 4.20}
For T = 310 K, r = 0.5 micron, h = 1 micron, σw ~ 1010 N/m2
,
∆θnutate ~ 0.8 microradian.
Second, the gimbal bearings have small frictional losses, exerting
small torques on the gyro and causing a small precession away from
the original orientation. The angular velocity of precession ωprecess
~ Tgimbal / (I3 ω) (rad/sec) where Tgimbal is the frictional torque caused
by an imperfect gimbal bearing. Assume that the gimbal is driven
by external forces to oscillate at some frequency νgimbal, and that a
gimbal bearing dissipates power at the rate of Pgimbal (watts), so that
each oscillatory motion of the gimbal dissipates Egimbal = Pgimbal/
νgimbal (joules). If the angular amplitude of the gimbal motion is αgimbal
(radians) and the gimbal radius is rgimbal, then the gimbal bearing
travels Xgimbal = αgimbal rgimbal (meters) per gimbal oscillation and
the force applied in dissipating an energy Egimbal is Fgimbal = Egimbal/
Xgimbal. Thus, the torque applied by each gimbal oscillation event is
Tgimbal = Fgimbal rgimbal = Pgimbal / (νgimbal αgimbal); Pgimbal = kp vgimbal2
(see Drexler10), where vgimbal = αgimbal νgimbal rgimbal is the sliding
speed of the gimbal bearing surfaces during movement and kp is
a constant that depends solely on the geometry of the bearing.
The change in orientation angle caused by each gimbal oscillation
event is ∆θosc = ωprecess / νgimbal. The number of gimbal oscillations
N = t νgimbal, where t is elapsed time since the gyro was last
calibrated. If gimbal oscillations are independent and randomly
distributed, then the total change in orientation angle is very roughly
∆θprecess ~ ∆θosc N1/2; assuming rgimbal ~ r, then:

∆θ
α ν
π ρω precess
p gimbal gimbal
1/2
2 ~
2 k t
 r h (radians) ( ) {Eqn. 4.21}
From Drexler10, kp = 2.7 x 10-14watt-sec2
/m2 as a conservative value
for a small (~2 nm) stiff bearing. Random hydrodynamic flows
induced by thermal fluctuations inside biological cells have a
characteristic duration tfluct ~ 10 millisec,1069 which suggests αgimbal
~ 0.06 radians (~3˚) from Eqn. 3.2 for an R ~ 1 micron in cyto
nanorobot. Taking r = 0.5 micron, h = 1 micron, ρ = 3510 kg/m3
for diamond (giving m ~ 3 x 10-15 kg), ω = 1 x 109 rad/sec (just
below the ωmax ~ 4.8 x 109 rad/sec bursting speed), and assuming
νgimbal ~ tfluct–1 = 100 Hz (to which the results are not terribly
sensitive), then ∆θprecess ~ 10-8 t1/2 (radians). Thus a ∆θprecess ~ 1
microradian orientation shift takes ~1 hour; a ∆θprecess ~ 4
microradian shift takes ~1 day; and a ∆θprecess ~ 70 microradian
(~10 arcsec) shift takes ~1 year. (Total angular error ∆θtotal = ∆θprecess
+ ∆θnutate.) Thus a gimballed nanogyroscope may be sufficiently
stable to serve as a readily storable, easily transportable, and highly
accurate onboard orientation standard.
4.3.4.2 Nanopendulum Orientation Sensing
A nanopendulum may also be employed for orientational sensing.
As one example of a large class of related devices, consider a simple
rigid spherical nanopendulum of radius r and mass m, with a large
hemispherical bob free to swing through the entire solid angle about
a central pivot point (Fig. 4.5), with a gimballed housing to allow
active avoidance of the pivot support beam. The nanopendulum
bob moves along a spherical surface located far enough from a
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 101
concentric spherical sensor grid of radius R = r + zsep to minimize
van der Waals interactions (Sections 3.5.1 and 9.2), with bob and
sensor surfaces electrically neutral or uniformly mutually repulsive.
Much like the pin cushion receptor model (Section 3.5.7.4), the
sensor grid consists of a spherical array of diamondoid sensor rods
∆x ~ 1 nm wide that are rapidly and simultaneously extended into
the evacuated sensor cavity to determine bob position during a
measurement cycle of duration tmeas. Radial sensor rod velocity
should exceed typical tangential bob velocity by at least 1-2 orders
of magnitude. For the example given below, a sensor stud on a
500-nm bob that is turning at vturn ~ vthermal = 3.6 mm/sec passes a
~1 nm sensor rod in ~280 nanosec; a sensor rod displacing ~1 nm
in the radial direction in ~1 nanosec travels at vrod ~ 1 m/sec. This
nanopendulum may serve both as an orientation sensor and as a
rotation rate sensor, using principles similar to vestibular (semicircular
canal) mechanics.449
If a simple nanopendulum spherical sensor housing with bob
initially at rest in a uniform vertical gravity field g is rotated through
the smallest detectable angle θmin (radians) around the center pivot,
then ignoring friction, the bob’s position over the sensor grid moves
a distance ∆x, hence
∆θmin = ∆x / r {Eqn. 4.22}
For ∆x = 1 nm and r = 500 nm, ∆θmin ~ 2 milliradians (~0.1
deg). For a practical sliding interface (e.g., between bob and sensor
surface) of contact area S and turning velocity vturn, Drexler10 estimates
frictional dissipation, primarily driven by shear-reflection drag and
band-stiffness scattering, as Pdrag ~ k1 vturn2 S, where k1 ~ 400 kg/
m2
-sec, hence the energy dissipated between the bob and the nearest
sensor rod (the one interacting with the bob) is Edrag ~ k1 vturn S ∆x.
Bob gravitational energy Ebob = m g r sin ∆θmin ~ m g r ∆θmin for
small displacements. The bob swings freely at the minimum
displacement if Ebob/Edrag >1. If m = 10-15 kg, r = 500 nm, and S =
1 nm2
, then vturn < 2.5 m/sec or ω < 49 megaradians/sec for the bob
to swing freely (vs. vthermal = 3.6 mm/sec (Eqn. 3.3) and ωres ~ 9900
rad/sec for this pendulum).
The bob-up/bob-down energy differential is ~2 m g r = 9.8 zJ
~ 2.3 kT for m = 10-15 kg and r = 500 nm. To distinguish opposite
orientations (∆θ ~ π) requires Nmeas ~ (kT / 2 m g r)2 ~ 1 measurement
for this sensor. To distinguish ∆θmin ~ 2 milliradians requires averaging
Nmeas ~ (kT / Ebob)
2 ~ 190,000 independent measurements (of
~0.002 kT/measurement) or tmeas ~ 190 microsec using a sensor
rod clock cycle of ~1 nanosec. Thus, after subtracting out the effects of
translation displacements as determined by linear accelerometers
(Section 4.3.3), a nanodevice can measure angular displacements in
its orientation to within ± ∆θmin in a measurement time tmeas ~10-4
sec. With sensor rods moving at ~1 m/sec, energy dissipation for
each rod sliding in its housing is ~0.01 zJ/cycle (Section 10.2.1). If
only ~100 test rods need be triggered to continuously track the
moving stud, then a sensor rod clock cycle of ~1 nanosec implies a
continuous nanopendulum power dissipation of ~1 pW; additional
drag power loss between stud and contacting rod is only Pdrag
~0.0004 pW.
Many other configurations of this basic device are readily
conceived and may be more volume-efficient, including nested
spheres or ovoids, two-dimensional rocking disk sections for in-plane
rotational measurements (three devices required for monitoring all
angular degrees of freedom in a rigid rotator), and multiaxial
circumferential tracks or tubes containing rolling balls or sliding
plugs. J. Logajan suggests that a pair of linear three-dimensional
Fig. 4.5. Spherical nanopendulum sensor for angular displacement and rotational velocity.
102 Nanomedicine • Volume I
translation accelerometers should be able to unambiguously extract
the 3 translation and 3 rotation components of all possible acceleration
vectors. Rotation about any axis will result in distinctly different
mass displacements while accelerated translation along any axis will
result in identical displacements.
4.3.4.3 Nanopendulum Tachometry
The smallest angular velocity detectable using a simple
nanopendulum is given approximately by ωmin ~ ∆x / r tmeas = 2
milliradian/sec (~0.1 deg/sec) for ∆x = 1 nm, r = 500 nm, and tmeas
= 1 sec. The largest detectable angular velocity ωmax ~ 2 π / tmeas if
tmeas is the minimum time required to count one complete rotation
of the sensor; the smallest tmeas ~ 2 π / ωmax ~ 100 nanosec for ωmax
~ 49 megaradians/sec—or ~5% of the bursting speed (Eqn. 4.17)
for an r = 1 micron spherical diamondoid nanodevice.
What rotational displacements will normally be encountered by
an in vivo medical nanorobot? From Equation 3.2, a 1-micron device
experiences instantaneous Brownian rotations of ωB = (kT / 4 π η
R3 τ)
1/2 radians/sec, where τ = (MWkg / 32 π kT NA cH2O R4
)
1/2,
the mean time between molecular collisions with the device (mostly
by water molecules), from Equation 4.3, where cH2O ~ 3.3 x 1028
molecules/m3
. For R = 0.5 microns and T = 310 K, τ ~ 6 x 10-20
sec/collision and ωB ~ 7 x 109 rad/sec, with each displacement of
~ τ ωB = 4 x 10-10 radian, none of which are detectable. However,
the net of all Brownian rotational displacements is one rotation
every 16 sec, ~0.4 radian/sec (Section 3.2.1).
The largest measurable angular displacements in vivo are caused
by tumbling due to differential shear forces in the bloodstream.
Normal vessel wall shear rates in physiological bloodflow range from
100-1400 radians/sec in the larger arteries to 500-4000 radians/sec
in the smaller arteries and capillaries.386 The measured rolling
velocity of white cells during vascular “tank tread” locomotion
(Section 9.4.3.6) on venule walls is ~40 micron/sec, or ~8 radians/
sec, which may be encountered by nanodevices employing
cytocarriage (Section 9.4.7). The human vestibular mechanism has
a frequency response range of 0.048-260 radians/sec.449
Thus, the maximum range of physiologically relevant rotation
rates is 10-2 to 104 radians/sec. Since the natural harmonic frequency
of a simple nanopendulum is ωres = (g/r)1/2 = 4400 radians/sec for r
= 500 nm, the possibility of forced oscillations and resonance need
be faced only when measuring the highest likely physiological rotation
rates, in which case the addition of a damping force Fdamp ~ m vturn
ωres during resonance events should eliminate the problem. Fdamp
for critical damping peaks at ~mg ~ 0.01 pN for the m = 10-15 kg, r
= 500 nm case (vturn ~ 2 mm/sec).
4.4 Force Nanosensors
Piconewton forces may be applied and must be detected by medical
nanodevices. Pendulum- and cantilever-based sensors may be used
to probe nanoscale forces, to monitor the ambient gravitational field,
to measure molecular-scale masses to single-proton accuracy, and to
discriminate among molecules having different isotopic composition.
4.4.1 Minimum Detectable Force
Extremely small forces have been measured using macroscale
instrumentation, particularly the atomic force microscope (AFM).
In 1998, experimental forces of 1 nN in the contact regime and 1
pN in the noncontact regime were routinely measured.450 In 1994,
D. Rugar achieved a force sensitivity of 5 x 10-16 N using an AFM
with a 90-nm thick cantilever at room temperature,489 and in 1998
Rugar reported a force resolution of 7 x 10-18 N using a magnetic
resonance force microscope (MRFM) with a 230-micron long,
60-nm thick, silicon cantilever.3256The theoretical limit on the force
sensitivity of the AFM has been estimated as 10-18 - 10-19 N for
temperatures near absolute zero445,489 using fiber optic interferometry
or other techniques. However, many of these methods are impractical
or impossible to employ in medical nanodevices.
What is the minimum force Fmin likely to be detectable by
nanorobot sensors? Several lines of reasoning produce consistent
answers. For example, force may be measured by the displacement
∆x of a beam against the known resistive pressure provided by a
spring of minimum stiffness ks; that is, Fmin ~ ks ∆x. However, the
energy stored in the spring must exceed thermal noise energy, with
SNR ~ ln (ks ∆x2 /2 kT) (Eqn. 4.9), giving Fmin = 2kT eSNR / ∆x.
For T = 310 K and SNR = 2, Fmin = 100 pN at ∆x = 0.6 nm, 10 pN
at 6 nm, and 1 pN at 60 nm. Indeed, the natural molecular motors
(kinesin, dynein, and actin-myosin) have isometric force outputs
on the order of 1-14 pN per protein molecule, which are routinely
observed using microscale cantilever spring sensors
measuring total forces of 10-100 pN.452-455,1058,1247 Breaking antigenantibody or receptor-ligand interactions generally requires rupture
forces in the 50-300 pN range.3200 A force of ~160 pN separates
biotin that is seated in its avidin receptor; ~85 pN pulls iminobiotin
out of the avidin receptor.1075 A force of ~300 pN ruptures a hydrogen
bond between two isolated water molecules,1030 but >3000 pN are
likely to be needed to rupture a single C-C covalent bond.10,1131
The rupture strength of single covalent bonds has been directly
measured experimentally by AFM as, for instance, 2000 ± 300 pN
for Si-C (528 zJ/molecule dissociation enthalpy, 0.185 nm bond
length) and 1400 ± 300 pN for Au-S.3193
Force sensing may also require using measurement devices that
involve sliding interfaces of two mutually inert periodic surfaces.
This motion may be characterized by the potential energy of interaction, ~0.1-1 zJ as determined by Monte Carlo simulations of
typical diamondoid material at 0.2-0.5 nm separations.10 Assuming a
minimum 0.5 zJ energy barrier, for small sliding contacts the typical
force amplitude Fmin ~ 1.7 x 1010 ∆Vbarrier ~ 8.5 pN.10
A force of 10 piconewtons across a small-molecule receptor (0.3
nm)3 of surface area 0.09 nm2 represents an energy density of ~108
J/m3 x 0.027 nm3 = 2.7 zJ ~ 0.6 kT. And the nanorobotic
manipulator arm described in Section 9.3.1.4 is capable of
~picometer step sizes, representing a minimum applicable force of
Fmin ~ 10 pN assuming 0.04 m/N compliance10 for the entire
mechanism. Thus as a conservative estimate, the smallest force that
is reliably detectable (and applicable) by nanodevices is probably
~10 pN.
Finally, a nanosensor of dimension L able to distinguish two
forces differing by ∆F newtons has a probability of erroneous
measurement10 of
Perr ~ exp (-L ∆F / 4 kT) {Eqn. 4.23}
For ∆F = 10 pN and T = 310 K, Perr = 1% for L = 8 nm, or 0.01%
for L = 16 nm, so reliable nanoscale picoforce sensors may be
~10-20 nm in size.
4.4.2 Nanogravimeters
Research in space medicine has discovered that micron-scale
elements of the immune system have extraordinary sensitivity to
gravity. One study found that bone marrow-derived (B6MP102)
macrophage single cells respond after 8 seconds to exposure to a
10-2 g hypogravity environment as indicated by increased cell
spreading,468 a well-known marker of cell activation. Individual
immune system cells placed in microgravity exhibit enhanced growth
but depressed differentiation,468 decreased activation by concanavalin
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 103
A,470 a 20% reduction in glucose metabolism, increased resistance
to antibiotics, increased number of pseudopodia on monocytes, and
changes in cytoplasmic streaming velocity and frequency.469
As of 1998, the exact mechanism by which the leukocyte “gravity
sensor” operates remained unknown. It has been speculated that
differences in densities of several organelles, such as the nucleolus,
the ribosomes, and the centrioles, could generate detectable pressures
on the structure of the cytoskeleton under gravitational loading469,471
mediated through mechanosensitive stretch-activated ion channels
or the extracellular matrix.468 While indirect gravitational effects
that modify the cellular environment (such as reduced sedimentation
or decreased thermal convection due to hypogravity) could also be
responsible, a direct interaction of the gravitational force with cellular
structures472,473 appears to be the most likely sensor mechanism.
For instance, if a change in gravitational loading equivalent to the
force generated by a natural molecular motor (F ~ 1 pN; Section
4.4.1) is detectable by the cytoskeleton, and this force is applied to
the entire mass of a (10 micron)3 cell (m ~ 10-12 kg), then the minimum detectable gravitational acceleration is g ~ F/m ~ 1 m/sec2
 =
0.1 g, which should be adequate to detect the onset of hypogravity.
A nanomechanical gravity sensor of similar size to a macrophage
cell may be at least 100,000 times more sensitive. For example, the
energy of a tethered mass swinging freely in a uniform gravity field
is approximately Eg ~ m g ∆h, where ∆h is the maximum vertical
amplitude of the motion. To be detectable, oscillator energy must
exceed thermal noise energy, so SNR ~ ln (m g ∆h Nmeas1/2 / kT),
giving gmin = kT eSNR / m ∆h Nmeas1/2 ~ kT eSNR / ρ L4
 Nmeas1/2 for
a bob mass of density ρ and size L3
, Nmeas independent measurements,
and assuming ∆h ~ L. If T = 310 K, SNR = 2, Nmeas = 1, and ρ =
21,450 kg/m3 (Pt), then gmin = 0.1 g for L ~ 1 micron, 0.01 g for L
~ 2 microns, 10-5 g for L ~ 11 microns, and 10-6 g for L = 20 microns,
the size of the average human tissue cell (Section 8.5.1).
Regarding nanogravimeter design, for a pendulum of length L
in a gravity field g ~ 9.81 m/sec2 (1 g), the resonant period of the
motion Tres = 2 π (L/g)1/2 = 2 x 10-3 sec for L = 1 micron, 9 x 10-3
sec for L = 20 microns. If ∆tmin = 1 nanosec is the minimum
detectable decrease in resonant period caused by an increase in gravity
from g to g + ∆g, then the minimum detectable change in gravitation
force is

∆g / g 1 L
g k ~ 10
g L 2
9
1/2 = −






−
{Eqn. 4.24}
for a medical nanorobot, where kg = (∆tmin / 2 π) + (L/g)1/2. For L = 1
micron, ∆g / g ~ 10-6; for L = 20 microns, ∆g / g ~ 2 x 10-7.
4.4.3 Single-Proton Massometer
A nanopendulum may also be used to measure molecular-scale
masses. Torsion, helical spring, and vibrating rod mechanisms all
will work, but one of the most efficient designs for weighing the
smallest masses may be the coiled suspension-spring cantilever
massometer illustrated schematically in Figure 4.6, which is analogous
in principle to the traditional quartz crystal microbalance.2896 In
this design, a beam of length Lbeam and circular cross-sectional radius
Rbeam is hinged at one end and carries a sample holder of solid
volume Vsample at the other end. The beam is supported (a variable
distance Lspring from the hinge) by a spring consisting of a movable
suspension rod of total length lrod, circular cross-sectional radius
rrod, and spring constant ks ~ π2
 rrod
4 E G / (G lrod
3 + E π rrod2
 lrod)
using spring (rod) material of density ρ, Young’s modulus E, and
shear modulus G.* The natural resonance period for this unloaded
system is T0 = (2 π Lbeam/Lspring) (m0/ks)
1/2 = Z m0
1/2, where Z =
(2 Lbeam / Lspring rrod2
) ((G lrod
3 + E π rrod2
 lrod) / E G)1/2 and m0 = ρ
(Vsample + π Lbeam Rbeam2 + π lrod rrod2
). Gravitational loading is
negligible for suspension system mass m << (ks Lspring2 / g Lbeam2
) ~
10-15 kg; m ~ 10-20 kg in the exemplar system.
After adding a test mass ∆m to the sample holder, the resonance
period increases to Tm = Z (m0 + ∆m)1/2, which may be detected if
Tm - T0  ∆tmin ~ 1 nanosec, the minimum convenient time interval
(Section 10.1). Hence the minimum detectable molecular weight
∆MW, expressed in proton masses (mp = 1.67 x 10-27 kg), is

∆∆ ∆ MW m/m m m t /Z m (protons) p p
1
0
1/2
min
2
== + ( ) − 0


 

 −
{Eqn. 4.25}
In Figure 4.6, beam and rod are coiled in two dimensions
(although three-dimensional coiling, more difficult to depict, provides
maximum compactness). Lbeam and lrod are chosen to minimize total
coil area Acoil = 2 Rbeam Lbeam + 2 rrod lrod. Using aluminum for the
rod and beam (E = 6.9 x 1010 N/m2
, G = 2.6 x 1010 N/m2
, ρ = 2700
kg/m3
), Lbeam = 1200 nm, lrod = 1920 nm, rrod = 0.5 nm, Vsample = 1
nm3
, and ∆tmin = 10-9 sec, then ∆MW ~ 1 proton for Lspring = 1 nm
>> ∆xmin = 0.01 nm, the minimum measurable displacement (Section
4.3.1). (For Lspring > 1 nm, physiological ~1 g accelerative loads
on a ~1 micron nanorobot in which the sensor is embedded produce
undetectable accelerative beam displacements < ∆xmin.)
*The lrod-3 dependence of ks is not strictly valid for a folded structure because the forces at the end of a folded spring have a smaller mechanical advantage, so the structure
acts somewhat stiffer. Further investigation is warranted. However, a large number of alternative low-stiffness structures are available including van der Waals contacts with
low loading, gas springs, diamagnetic traps and actively controlled electrostatic traps [J. Soreff, personal communication, 1997].
Fig. 4.6. Single-proton massometer sensor using coiled suspensionspring cantilever.
104 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Moving the suspension rod closer to the sample holder reduces
device sensitivity. For Lspring = Lbeam, minimum ∆MW ~ 1200
protons, permitting moderately large molecules to be weighed in
minimum time (~10-6 sec). Using a very thin sensor configuration
(hsensor~20 nm) and coils occupying ~50% of sensor cavity space,
sensor dimensions are (79 nm)2 x 20 nm giving a massometer volume
~105 nm3 or ~0.01% of the total volume of a 1 micron3 nanorobot.
Sensor mass is ~ 3 x 10-19 kg, including diamondoid housing and
prorated share of support mechanisms. If one measurement cycle
including sample loading/unloading operations can be completed
every ~10 microsec, then the device processes its own mass of glucose
molecules in ~10 sec. Note that biological molecules weighed in air
or in vacuo may lose water of hydration, whereas weighing in water
presents other complications that merit further investigation.
J. Soreff points out that for a molecule on a spring, the precision
of the measurement is linked to the sharpness of the resonance,
which is optimized to the degree the vibrational frequency of the
spring/molecular mass system is kept well below the vibrational
resonance frequencies of the molecule itself. The following discussion
reports the results of a simple lumped-element analysis of the effects of
internal vibration on the massometer completed for the author by
J. Soreff, which confirms the previously described performance
estimates for the massometer.
Suppose that it is desired to weigh some mass M to a precision
∆M by attaching it to a weak measuring spring (spring constant
kweak) and measuring the shift in resonant frequency. The shift in
frequency due to coupling to an internal mode of the sample must
be less than (1/2) (∆M / M) (1 / 2 π) (kweak/M)1/2. If the sample has
some lowest internal mode frequency νint, then approximating the
sample as two M/2 masses separated by xstrong connected by a strong
spring (kstrong) gives νint = (1/π) (kstrong/M)1/2. If this sample is attached
to a weak measuring spring of length xweak, which is in turn attached to
a rigid support, then the equations of motion are:

M/2 x k x k x x strong weak weak strong strong weak
// ( ) = − + ( ) −
{Eqn. 4.26}

M/2 x k x x strong strong weak strong
// ( ) = ( ) − {Eqn. 4.27}
Setting xweak = est and xstrong = R est where t = time, s = time
constant, and R = -(1 + (2 kweak / M s2
)), and since the angular
frequencies of the two springs are ωstrong = 2 π νint = 2 (kstrong/M)1/2
and ωweak = (kweak/M)1/2, then the lower frequency solution for ωweak
<< ωstrong may be approximated by s = i ωweak (1 - ωweak2 / 2 ωstrong2
)
and so the (undesired) fractional change in frequency due to the
flexibility of the object to be weighed is

ω ω weak strong
1/2 / < ( ) ∆M/M {Eqn. 4.28}
For a molecule sample size of Lsample, νint ~ vsound / Lsample ~ 500
GHz for vsound ~ 1500 m/sec and Lsample ~ 3 nm; M = ρ Lsample
3
 =
2.7 x 10-23 kg for ρ = 1000 kg/m3
. To detect the mass difference of
a single proton in a sample molecule, sensor Q = M / mp = 16,000;
from Eqn. 4.28, the sensor may operate at a factor of Q1/2 below
νint, or νspring ~ νint / Q1/2 ~ 4 GHz. A period of 0.25 nanosec is
slightly too short to allow a phase shift of ∆tmin ~ 1 nanosec, since
the period is only one-quarter of this. However, a phase shift of π
radians should accumulate in tmeas = Q / 2 νspring ~ 2 microsec and
should be detectable by looking at magnitudes of forces. Interestingly,
an SPM microprobe of circular cross-section and exponential profile
with a 0.1 nm2 tip has been proposed that could also reach ~proton
mass detection sensitivity at room temperature and 1 atm pressure
with an eigenmode frequency of 10 GHz;1195 an electrically-driven
carbon nanotube-based resonant-beam balance demonstrated ~10-17
kg (~1010 proton or ~0.01 micron3
 mass) sensitivity in 1999.3023
Existing surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices458 are chemical
sensors that can measure areal mass densities as small as 80 picogram/
cm2
, or 0.01 N2 molecule per nm2 of surface, though current
devices are limited to ~micron2 areas. A proposed quartz
microresonator microbalance could detect a 10-6 molecular monolayer,459
the equivalent of 5 x 10-9 molecule per nm2
. Detection of ~400 million
protons using an MRFM vibrating rod ~60 nm thick was demonstrated
by Rugar3256 in 1998.
4.4.4 Isotope Discrimination
It will often be useful in nanomedicine to distinguish molecules
containing different isotopes of the same chemical elements, for
example to count the number of organic molecules in a sample that
contain radioactive C14 atoms in place of stable C12 atoms or to
make direct assays of heavy radiometal-contaminated tissues.
Nanodevices may also sort isotopically heteronuclear molecules into
homonuclear fractions, for example to separate deuterochemicals
from hydrochemicals or to acquire isotopically pure materials with
which to construct:
a. small, high-speed rotors with precisely balanced mass distributions;10
b. components with extremely fine size differences (Section 3.5.6);
c. nanostructures with maximum thermal conductivity (Table 4.1),
or mixed isotopes to reduce thermal conductivity (Section
6.3.4.4 (D)); or
d. long-lived isotopically pure structures that generate no internal
radioactivity, thus promoting longer device lifetimes (Chapter 13).
The most reliable sensor for discriminating among isotopes
within target molecules is the single-proton massometer (Section
4.4.3). Isotopes of any chemical element differ in mass by at least
~1 neutron (~protonic) increments. Thus a massometer with singleproton resolution can resolve all isotopes starting from chemically
pure samples. Isobars (atoms having the same mass number) and
isotones (atoms having the same number of neutrons) may be
finally resolved chemically; nuclear isomers differing in mass by
~0.001 amu cannot be resolved. Teragravity centrifugation (Section
3.2.5) and time-of-flight particle-beam deflection techniques (Section
4.7.1) may also prove useful.
Isotopes vary in many subtle ways due to their mass differences,
although it is not yet clear how a potential isotope nanosensor might
exploit some or all of these distinctions:
A. Line Shifts — The electronic energy states of atoms or molecules
depend on the reduced nuclear mass, causing a spectral line shift
of ~1.0005 between hydrogen and deuterium, less among heavier
isotopes, detectable spectroscopically.
B. Hyperfine Structure — Isotopes differ in electrical quadrupole
moment, nuclear spin and magnetic moment, giving rise to
hyperfine structure in the optical spectra, especially in the heavier
elements. For example, the magnetic moments of hydrogen and
deuterium (2.79268 and 0.857387 nuclear magnetons,
respectively) are distinguishable via NMR (Section 4.8.3). The NMR
frequency in a 10 kilogauss magnetic field is 42.5759 MHz for H,
6.53566 MHz for D. Of course, not all isotopes are NMR sensitive.
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 105
C. Vibrations and Rotations — Molecular spectra are especially
sensitive to isotopic changes, since the quanta of vibrational and
rotational energies are directly dependent upon the masses of the
atoms involved, and there are also some subtle effects from differences
in nuclear spin. Separations are commonly achieved by laser
excitation.
D. Cross-Sections — Isotopes have different thermal neutron
capture cross sections; for instance, the cross-section of C12 is 3.7 x
10-3 barns (1 barn = 10-24 cm2
) compared to 9 x 10-4 barns for C13
and <10-6 barns for C14. (Electron scattering might be better, since
the electron is less likely to cause the nucleus to fission and it is
generally difficult to use neutrons to probe samples on the molecular
scale.) Similarly, the neutron cross-section for H2O is 0.6 barns
compared to 9.2 x 10-4 barns for D2O.
E. Other Properties — Isotopes differ slightly in various bulk
properties, many of which could be measured in submicron-scale
aliquots by nanosensors. The ability of both large mammals and
micron-size photosynthetic plant cells to preferentially concentrate
C12 or C13 in organic matter,1094 and the predicted ability of carbon
nanotubes to selectively extract tritium from low-concentration H2-T2
mixtures,3046 constitute proofs of principle that at least some of the
bulk properties listed in Table 4.1 may become useful in achieving
nanoscale isotopic separation or purification.
4.5 Pressure Sensing
This Section describes the ability of medical nanodevices to detect
and measure fluid pressure variations while functioning inside the
human body. Generation of acoustic signals for power transmission
(Section 6.3.2), communication (Section 7.2.1), and navigation
(Section 8.3.3) are considered elsewhere. Acoustic macrosensing is
described in Section 4.9.1.
4.5.1 Minimum Detectable Pressure
A change in the ambient pressure in a fluid environment (∆P)
may be determined by measuring the change in volume (∆V) of a
fixed quantity of gas at constant temperature, relative to a known
sensor volume at a known reference pressure. (Thermal sensors elsewhere in the nanorobot provide readings by which corrections can
be made for temperature variations.) If the sensor volume consists
of a cylinder of fixed cross-sectional area, the change in volume is
converted into a linear displacement of a piston located at the interface
between gas and fluid environment. The change in Gibbs free
Table 4.1 Isotopic Variation in Bulk Properties Possibly Useful in Nanomedicine390,475,476,763,1309,2325,2690,2703,2962-2964
Common Rarer
Bulk Property Units Isotope Isotope Comments
Absolute density kg/m3 997.044 (H2O) 1104.45 (D2O) at 25˚C
Critical density kg/m3 325 (H2O) 363 (D2O)
Critical pressure atm 218.5 (H2O) 218.6 (D2O)
Critical temperature ˚C 374.2 (H2O) 371.5 (D2O)
Temperature of maximum density ˚C 3.98 (H2O) 11.2 (D2O)
Freezing point ˚C 0 (H2O) 3.82 (D2O)
Boiling point ˚C 100 (H2O) 101.42 (D2O)
Triple point (solid/liquid/vapor) K 13.96 (H2) 18.73 (D2)
Triple point (Ice I/Ice III/liquid) K 251.2 (H2O) 254.4 (D2O) at 2054/2181 atm (H2O/D2O)
Heat of fusion kcal/mole 0.028 (H2) 0.047(D2) at triple point
Heat of vaporization kcal/mole 9.70 (H2O) 9.96 (D2O)
Heat of formation kcal/mole -68.32 (H2O) -70.41 (D2O) liquids at 25˚C
Formation rection equilibrium constant --- 41.553 (H2O) 42.664 (D2O) logarithm at 25˚C, liquid state
Electrochemical reaction potential volts O (2H+
+2e=H2) -0.044 (2D+
+2e=D2) at 25˚C
Thermodynamic entropy cal/K 16.72 (H2O) 18.16 (D2O) liquids at 25˚C
Lower limit of inflammability % conc. 4.65% (H2) 5.0% (D2) combustion in O2 at 1 atm
Upper limit of inflammability % conc. 93.9% (H2) 95.0% (D2) combustion in O2 at 1 atm
Surface tension joule/m2 0.07275 (H2O) 0.0678 (D2O) at 20˚C
Absolute viscosity kg/m-sec 0.001002 (H2O) 0.00126 (D2O) at 20˚C
Dielectric constant --- 80.36 (H2O) 79.755 (D2O) at 20˚C
Refractive index --- 1.33300 (H2O) 1.32844 (D2O)
Solubilities gm NaCl/liter 359 (H2O) 305 (D2O) at 20˚C
Aqueous dissociation constant --- 1.79 x 10-5 (NH4OH) 1.10 x 10-5 (ND4OH) Kb, 25˚C, 0.1-0.01N
Thermal conductivity watts/m-K ~3000 (pure C12) 2000 (1% C13) diamond at room temperature
Thermal diffusivity cm2
/sec 18.5 (0.1% C13) 12.3 (1% C13) diamond at room temperature
Isothermal compressibility kg/m3 1250 (H2O) 1390 (D2O) at 12,000 atm, 37˚C
Ionization energy --- 13.9965(H2O) 14.869 (D2O) logarithm at 25˚C
Ion mobilities (mole/liter)2 1.008 x 10-14 (H2O) 1.54 x 10-15 (D2O) ion product at 25˚C
Molar magnetic susceptibility cm3
/mole -12.97 x 10-6 (H2O) -12.76 x 10-6 (D2O) liquids at 20˚C
Superfluidity transition temperature K 2.12 (He4
) 0.003 (He3
) near absolute zero
Superconductivity transition temperature K 9 (PdH) 10 (PdD)
Reversible glass/liq. transition, Ice Ih K 129 (H2O) 134 (D2O)
Acoustic wave speed m/sec 1284 (H2) 890 (D2) at STP
Acoustic wave speed temp. dependence m/sec-K +2.2 (H2) +1.6 (D2) at 1 atm
Isotope-exchange chemical reaction rates m6
/sec 6.05 x 10-46 (O16+O322) 9.26 x 10-46 (O16+O362) ozone formation
Relative crystal lattice constant --- 1 (natural Ge) 1.00002 (Ge76) at 27˚C
Tunneling vibrational voltage millivolts 358 (C2H2) 266 (C2D2) at 8 K
106 Nanomedicine • Volume I
energy10 is ∆G = ∆P ∆V, while thermal noise ~kT. Pressure sensor
signal/noise ratio SNR ~ ln (∆P ∆V / kT), so at the minimum ∆G
the minimum detectable pressure ∆Pmin is measured at the maximum
possible volume change, or Vsensor (the sensor volume), given
approximately by

∆P ~ kT min e / V SNR
sensor {Eqn. 4.29}
using the classical ideal gas formulation. At SNR = 2, a (22 nm)3
 =
104 nm3 sensor (~5 x 105 atoms or ~10-20 kg for a cube with 1 nm
thick walls) can detect a minimum pressure change ∆Pmin ~ 0.03
atm; a (680 nm)3 = 0.3 micron3 sensor (~3 x 109 atoms, ~6 x 10-17
kg) detects ∆Pmin ~ 10-6 atm, probably near the practical limit for
mobile in vivo medical nanodevices. Note that ∆Pmin scales
approximately as the inverse cube of mean sensor dimension, and
immunity to thermal noise scales exponentially with sensor volume.
Current silicon micromachined pressure sensors are ~1 mm3 with
10-3 atm sensitivity,456,457 a factor of ~1012 poorer sensitivity than
the theoretical minimum for their size. (A field-effect chemical
sensor with an active sensing volume of 0.1 mm3
 that measures
pressure indirectly has detected a 10-11 atm step in hydrogen gas with
tmeas ~ 3 sec,458 only a factor of 1000 above the theoretical minimum
for a sensor of that size.) The human ear can detect pressure waves
as small as 2 x 10-10 atm.
A less sensitive approach relies on the observation that a change
in pressure P alters both density and bulk modulus of a compressed
fluid, variations that may be detected by measuring the change in
the speed of sound vs in the working fluid, given by
v B/ s
1/2 = ( ) ρ {Eqn. 4.30}
where B is bulk modulus of the fluid and ρ is fluid density. (dB/
dP)/B may be up to several times larger than (dρ/dP)/ρ for
molecular fluids, but there is some (dvs/dP)/vs for each fluid.
Differentiating Eqn. 4.30 with respect to P and using dρ/dP = ρ/B,
then dvs/dP = (dB/dP - 1) / 2 ρ1/2 B1/2. For water at 1 atm, dB/dP ~
8.4 atm/atm,567 ρ ~1000 kg/m3 and B = 22,000 atm, giving dvs/dP
~ 0.25 m/sec-atm. If ∆vs is the measured change in acoustic speed,
then:

∆ ∆ P v/d min s s = ( ) v /dP {Eqn. 4.31}
Velocity can be measured to ~0.1 mm/sec accuracy using a
micron-scale velocity sensor and tmeas ~ 1 sec (Section 4.3.2), so a
minimum ∆vs ~ 0.1 mm/sec implies ∆Pmin ~ 0.0004 atm.
4.5.2 Spatial Pressure Gradients
Two 0.3-micron3 pressure sensors located at either end of a
1-micron nanorobot could detect pressure changes as small as 10-6
atm per micron, a ~1 atm/m spatial gradient. The maximum
detectable gradient would involve adjacent measurements of minimum
(10-6 atm) and maximum (~104 atm) absolute pressure, a theoretical
peak spatial gradient of ~1016 atm/m, though a practical device could
not survive exposure to such extreme shear force.
4.5.3 Temporal Pressure Gradients
Driving the sensor at a frequency near νres may cause large
amplitude excursions unless the motion is heavily damped. The lowest
possible undamped resonance frequency νres for piston-type acoustic
sensors of size ~ L with minimum spring constant ks ~ 2 kT / L2 for
a maximally sensitive spring having an energy of ~kT when stretched
by L, and piston mass m, is

ν
π res s
1/2 1
2
k
m = 

 

 

 

 {Eqn. 4.32}
where m = ρ L2 h for a piston of area L2
, height h, and density ρ.
Assuming h/L = 0.1 and ρ ~ 1000 kg/m3
, νres = 21 MHz for an L =
22 nm sensor (ks = 1.8 x 10-5 N/m) and νres = 4 KHz for an L = 680
nm sensor (ks = 1.9 x 10-8 N/m). Resonance frequency may be adjusted
by selecting appropriate ks and m. In practical devices resonance
will occur at a slightly lower frequency than νres and with some
broadening of the peak, because m should also include the masses
of the shank of the piston plus a time-varying portion of the fluid
mass occupying the piston’s chamber (depending upon the timevarying position of the piston).
Consider the surface of a piston of height h, area L2 and mass m
to which a pressure spike of amplitude P (N/m2
) and frequency
νdriven is applied, producing a stroke length Xstroke. The solution for
the equation of motion of an undamped forced harmonic oscillator
has a maximum amplitude of Xstroke = Fspike / abs ( m (ωdriven2 - ωres2
))
where ω = 2 π ν, Fspike = P L2
 and m is defined above. The driving
frequency that produces stroke length Xstroke = L is given by:

ν
π ρ driven π ν 2
res
2
1/2
1
2
P
 L h = 4 

 

 

 

 − 

 

 {Eqn. 4.33}
For an L = 22 nm sensor driven to full throw by a minimum
detectable ∆Pmin = 0.03 atm pressure spike (again taking h/L = 0.1
and ρ ~ 1000 kg/m3
), νdriven = 34 MHz; νdriven = 45 GHz when the
sensor is driven to full throw by the maximum possible pressure
spike Pmax = 39,000 atm consistent with water remaining in the
liquid state (see below). The piston may be driven at these frequencies,
or slower, using triangular-wave pulse trains of pressure spikes of
these magnitudes.
For an L = 680 nm sensor driven to full throw by a minimum
detectable ∆Pmin = 10-6 atm pressure spike, νdriven = 6 KHz; νdriven =
1.5 GHz when the sensor is driven to full throw by the maximum
pressure spike Pmax = 39,000 atm.
What is the maximum tolerable pressure spike in aqueous media?
The requirement of subsonic piston motion in water gives the highest
maximum: Pmax < (1/2) ρ vsound2 (N/m2
), if ρ = 3510 kg/m3 for a
solid diamondoid piston and the speed of sound vs ~ 1450 m/sec in
water (Eqn. 4.30) for bulk modulus Bwater = 2.2 x 109 N/m2
, ρwater
= 1000 kg/m3
, giving Pmax < 39,000 atm. However, rapid dissipative
pressure spikes Pmax > 26,000 atm add sufficient energy to boil 310
K water, and isothermal static compression of pure water at 310 K
causes crystallization into Ice VI near ~11,500 atm. Additional
restrictions on (and features of) high-frequency pressure transducers
are described in Sections 6.3.3, 6.4.1, and 7.2.2.
4.5.4 Ullage Sensors
It will often be necessary to determine the degree to which a
fluid storage tank is full or empty. In most circumstances, an ullage
sensor may consist of a simple static pressure sensor embedded in
the tank wall, with readout calibrated according to the van der Waals
equation for gases and liquids (Section 10.3.2). A fractal network
of chemical sensors permeating the internal volume of the tank could
provide continuous readouts of local concentration which could be
integrated to estimate total storage in the tank. The force required
to rotate a paddle inside the tank would increase as a tank was filled,
due to the increase in net viscosity of the contents (Section 9.4.1.1).
Transmission time of thermal or acoustic pulses might also give some
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 107
measure of fluid concentration and physical phase. C. Phoenix suggests
storing liquids in a piston, allowing direct and precise molecular
volume readout, in designs where this is convenient; in theory, a
piston that slides the minimum measurable distance of ~10 pm
(Section 4.3.1) within the 2-nm-diameter throat of a water-filled
cylinder could detect the removal of a single water molecule from
the column.
4.6 Thermal Nanosensors
The ability of medical nanodevices to measure both absolute
temperature and changes in temperature is crucial for monitoring
in vivo physiological thermoregulatory mechanisms and intracellular
energy transactions. Precision thermal sensing is also important
within nanoscale devices to provide corrective input for pressure,
chemical, and displacement sensors, and to improve the stability of
onboard clocks. General limits of thermal sensing are considered
in Section 4.6.1, followed by several proposals for specific
implementations.
4.6.1 Minimum Detectable Temperature Change
A sensor system consisting of N atoms has (3N-6) internal
coordinates and thus ~(3N-6) oscillators, each with an average energy
of ~kT assuming no modes are high enough to be frozen out. However,
the standard deviation of the energy of the oscillators around the
mean energy is ~kT, and these energy fluctuations are uncorrelated
(ignoring coupling between the oscillators), so (3N-6) of them will
have an average fluctuation of kT (3N-6)1/2. (By comparison, the
energy in one 10-micron infrared photon is ~5 kT.) As a result, an
instantaneous measurement of the total energy of all N atoms gives
a minimum detectable temperature change ∆Tmin of

∆T / T 3N 6 ~ min 3N n V 1/2
meas d sensor
1/2 = ()( ) − − −
{Eqn. 4.34}
for a set of Nmeas independent temperature measurements using a
sensor of volume Vsensor constructed with material of atomic number
density nd, which might be maximized using diamond (nd = 1.76 x
1029 carbon atoms/m3
).
Thermal equilibration time tEQ ~ L2
 CV / Kt (Eqn. 10.24) for a
sensor of size L, of heat capacity CV (1.8 x 106 joules/m3
-K for
diamond) and of thermal conductivity Kt (2000 watts/m-K for
diamond460). Thus, tEQ ~ 10-13 sec for a sensor of size L = 10 nm,
10-11 sec for L = 100 nm, and 10-9 sec for L = 1 micron, so thermal
sensors up to 1 micron in size should easily achieve thermal equilibration within a typical measurement cycle time ∆tmin ~ 10-9 sec.
Sensor measurement time tmeas = Nmeas ∆tmin.
A (57 nm)3 sensor can detect ∆Tmin / T = 10-4 (~31 millikelvins
at 310 K) in a single measurement (Nmeas = 1), with measurement
time tmeas ~ 1 nanosec. A sensitivity of ∆Tmin / T = 10-6 (~310
microkelvins at 310 K) may be achieved using either a ~1 micron3
sensor with a single measurement (Nmeas = 1, tmeas = 1 nanosec) or a
(124 nm)3 sensor with Nmeas = 1000 independent measurement
cycles and tmeas = 1 microsec. Finally, a 1 micron3 sensor can detect
∆Tmin / T = 3 x 10-9 (~1 microkelvin at 310 K) with Nmeas = 100,000
independent sensor cycles, giving a measurement time tmeas ~ 100
microsec.
These figures are confirmed by experimental estimates of detector
noise temperature, such as ∆Tmin / T = (k / L3
 CV)
1/2 ~ 10-6 for a
silicon nitride detector678 with CV = 5.2 x 106 joules/m3
-K and L
~ 1 micron. It has been calculated that sensitivity of ~1 microkelvin
is theoretically possible using quartz electronic microresonators as
precision thermometers.462,1699Thermocouple probes with 100 nm
tips have already shown ~100 microkelvin sensitivity,463 tunneling
thermometers capable of measuring thermoelectric potential localized
to atomic-scale dimensions have been proposed,464 and experiments
leading toward “yoctocalorimetry” were being pursued in 1998.2928
For comparison, heat sensors in human skin have ∆Tmin / T ~ 3
x 10-4 (~90 millikelvins), and the infrared sensor pit of the rattlesnake is sensitive to an energy intensity of ~0.8 pJ/micron2 in a
measurement time tmeas ~35 millisec and achieves ∆Tmin / T ~ 3 x
10-6;
701,826 mosquitos register ∆Tmin / T ~ 6 x 10-6 at a distance of
~1 cm.
4.6.2 Piston-Based Temperature Sensors
Consider a coiled cylinder of cross-sectional area A filled with
gas at pressure P, with a piston at one end whose movement is
resisted by a constant-force spring (Fig. 4.7). Increasing gas
temperature from the coldest temperature at which the sensor will
operate (piston at maximum ingress), T0, to some warmer temperature T1
causes the piston to move from position x0 to position x1 while the
spring holds pressure constant at P inside the cylinder during the
measurement. If ∆x is the smallest measurable piston displacement
and ∆T = T1 - T0, then the poorest accuracy is

∆ ∆ T / T x x
x
x
x 0 N N1 1 0
0 0 meas
1/2 1/2 = − == + ( ) − − {Eqn. 4.35}
because ∆x has a thermal noise component as well,10 and the number
of gas molecules N = nd Vsensor where nd ~ 1028 gas molecules/m3 at
P = 1000 atm (Table 10.2). Sensitivity is maximized at the largest
feasible x0; for ∆T / T0 = 10-6 (~300 microkelvins at 310 K) and ∆x
= ∆xmin = 1 nm (Section 4.2.1), then x0 = 1000 microns, N = 109
gas molecules at 1000 atm (using the van der Waals equation of
state) and 310 K taking Nmeas = 1000, giving Vsensor = 10-19 m3 and
thus a cylinder cross-sectional area of A = Vsensor / x0 = (10 nm)2
.
There are ~1000 gas molecules per nanometer of cylinder length,
each traveling with mean thermal velocity vt ~ 500 m/sec (Eqn.
3.3). Tightly coiled into a cubical volume, the folded sensor size is
Lsensor ~ Vsensor1/3 ~ (464 nm)3 and measurement time tmeas = Nmeas
∆tmin ~ 1 microsec. Sensor mass is ~10-16 kg.
Fig. 4.7. Two-dimensional representation of a three-dimensional
micro-kelvin piston-based coiled-cylinder temperature sensor.
108 Nanomedicine • Volume I
The coiled tube design, though not strictly necessary, is nonetheless
convenient because it allows a continuous sensor element to be
arbitrarily distributed through the nanorobot volume, to be
concentrated in multiple specific interior regions, or to be placed
inside nanorobot components that will be required to flex such as
metamorphic protuberances. If instead the working gas is placed in
a cubical box of side Lbox with a sensor piston of area Ap, any change
in temperature causes the piston to move a distance ∆x = (Lbox
3
/Ap)
(∆T / T0) ~ (k T0 / ks)
1/2, where ks = (Ap/Lbox2
) (N kT0 / Lbox2
),
from Drexler;10 hence

∆T / T ~ A / N L 0 p box
2 1/2 ( ) {Eqn. 4.36}
which argues for a small piston, a large box, and a high operating
pressure to achieve maximum sensitivity. For Ap = 100 nm2
, N = 109
molecules, and Lbox = 464 nm, ∆T / T ~ 10-6.
4.6.3 Thermal-Expansion Temperature Sensors
Consider a thin rod of length x and width w, constructed as a
sandwich of two dissimilar materials each of thickness h, having
coefficients of linear expansion α1 and α2, respectively (Fig. 4.8).
When heated, the two materials expand differentially to lengths of
x (1 + αi ∆T) (neglecting the quadratic and higher-order terms in
αi), producing a cantilever deflection of θt = (x/h) (α1 - α2) (radians)
from simple geometry. The minimum detectable temperature change
∆Tmin = 2 π ∆xmin / x θt or

∆ ∆ T 8 h w x
V min
3 2
min
1 2 rod
2 = ( ) −
π
α α
{Eqn. 4.37}
where volume of the sandwich rod Vrod = 2 h w x. Taking ∆xmin =
10 pm, α1 = 2.38 x 10-5 /K for aluminum,460 α2 = 8 x 10-7 /K for
diamond at 310 K,460 h = w = 5 nm, and assuming sensor volume
Vsensor ~ 2 Vrod in a tightly packed three-dimensional coil configuration,
∆Tmin = 1 microkelvin for an L3 ~ (227 nm)3 sensor ~ 1% of the
volume of a 1-micron nanorobot. Use of a suitable negative-coefficient
material for α2, such as the ceramics zirconium tungstate1025 and
cordierite, can further reduce L by 5%-10%.
Measuring the volume of the sensor is essentially like taking an
inventory of total stored thermal energy, which has a kT N1/2
fluctuation term from adding the N uncorrelated kT fluctuations; hence

∆T / T ~ N n V 0 meas d sensor
1/2 ( )− {Eqn. 4.38}
Hence, to achieve ∆T ~ 1 microkelvin at T0 = 310 K with this
sensor may require Nmeas ~ 47 million independent measurements
of ∆tmin = 1 nanosec each, or tmeas ~ 47 millisec.
Micromechanical silicon cantilever heat sensors (microcalorimeters)
of ~20,000 micron3 volume have already achieved ∆Tmin = 10
microkelvins at room temperature (∆Tmin / T ~ 3 x 10-8), responding
to ~1 pJ of heat in a measurement time tmeas ~ 1 millisec.461
Thermal-expansion nanosensors might also exploit the temperature
sensitivity of viscoelastic materials (e.g., modulus of relaxation).
4.6.4 Mechanochemical Temperature Sensors
Since binding rates are temperature sensitive, a chemical
concentration sensor using steric probes immersed in a sample
containing a precisely known concentration of target ligands can be
used as a temperature sensor. Similarly, enzyme reaction rates increase
with a change in temperature according to

∆T
10 ln k /k
ln Q
2 1
10
= ( )
( ) {Eqn. 4.39}
where ∆T = T2 - T1, k1 and k2 are the reaction rate constants at
temperatures T1 and T2, and Q10 is the well-known temperature
coefficient—the ratio of the rates of reaction measured at two
temperatures 10˚C apart. Q10 ~ 2 for most enzymes, but may range
up to 4 for some enzymes that catalyze reactions with unusually
high activation energies. Assuming Q10 ~ 4, the (112 nm)3 sensor with
∆c / c = 0.01(1%) from Section 4.2.2 can distinguish temperatures
0.07 K apart; the huge (1.44 micron)3 sensor with ∆c / c = 10-5
(0.001%) resolves ∆T ~ 72 microkelvins. Because of their relative
volumetric inefficiency, such sensors are best used in large ∆T
applications. Similar considerations apply to thermal sensors based
on the temperature sensitivity of protein folding (as in heat shock
protein mediators of cellular responses to a 5 K change465,466), protein
thermal contraction,1261 and thermal conformation rate constants for
protein α helices that typically coil in ~10-6 sec.467,2324 The quantum
tunneling transmission coefficient for ion channels is also exquisitely
temperature-sensitive679 and thus could serve as the basis of a
nanoscale thermal sensor.
4.6.5 Spatial Thermal Gradients
Two (200-400 nm)3 thermal sensors located at either end of a
1-micron nanorobot can detect temperature changes as small as 10-6
K per micron, a ~1 kelvin/m spatial gradient. The maximum
detectable gradient in nanomedical systems would involve adjacent
measurements differing by ~100˚C, a peak spatial gradient of ~108
kelvins/m. The detection event must be completed before the two
sensors can thermally equilibrate, e.g., tmeas < tEQ = L2
 CV / Kt (Eqn.
10.24). If the material between the sensors is mostly diamondoid,
then tEQ ~ 10-9 sec; if mostly water, then tEQ ~ 10-5 sec, for L = 1
micron.
4.6.6 Temporal Thermal Gradients
On the timescale of nanomachine operations, typically 10-9 - 10-6
sec, the human body provides an essentially isothermal operating
regime. However, medical nanorobots circulating in the bloodstream
may encounter ∆T of ~3 K during one circulation time ~60 sec
under normal circumstances (Section 8.4.1), a temporal thermal
gradient of ~0.1 kelvin/sec, or >10 kelvin/sec at 1 mm tissue depth
for a fingertip placed on a 600 K stove. Thermal nanosensors can
take independent measurements differing by as much as ~100˚C in
~10-9 sec (e.g., Section 4.6.2), giving a maximum detectable thermal
Fig. 4.8. Thermal expansion temperature sensor (schematic
representation only).
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 109
gradient of 1011 kelvins/sec, far in excess of physiological rates.*
Detection of the minimum ~1 microkelvin change between two
measurements taken 1 sec apart probably represents the minimum
practical temperature gradient, ~1 microkelvin/sec. For comparison,
the record-holder in the insect world is the eyeless cave beetle
Speophyes lucidulus, whose antennae can detect thermal change rates
as small as ~3000 microkelvins/sec.812
The extraordinary thermal conductivity of diamond ensures that
endogenous nanorobot waste heat is rapidly conducted to the
surrounding aqueous medium. For example, a 1 micron3
diamondoid nanorobot generating 10 picowatts of onboard power
at its core experiences a temperature differential of ~10-8 K between
core and perimeter (using thermal conductivity Kt = 2000 watts/
m-K for diamond460), well below minimum detectable limits.
4.7 Electric and Magnetic Sensing
4.7.1 Electric Fields
The electric field E (volts/m) caused by a single point charge q
(e.g., an electron or singly-charged ion) is given by Coulomb’s law as

E q
4 r
e
0 e
2 = πε κ
{Eqn. 4.40}
where qe = 1.60 x 10-19 coul (one charge), ε0 = 8.85 x 10-12 farad/m
(permittivity constant), κe = dielectric constant of the matter
traversed by the electric field (κe = 74.31 for pure water at 310 K,
5.7 for diamond, 1 for vacuum or air), and r = distance from the
charge, in meters. The field at a distance of 1 nm from a point
charge is ~109 volts/m in air, 2 x 107 volts/m in water. The force
between two unit charges F = qe E = 230 pN in air, 3 pN in water,
at 1-nm separation.
What is the magnitude of electric fields likely to be encountered
in nanomedical situations? Electric fields in the human body may
be generated from internal or external sources. Internally, ions and
individual molecules may carry static electric fields. For example,
the surface of an isolated charged amino acid (Section 3.5.5) has ~1
charge/nm2
. Debye-Huckel shielding due to counterion flow in salty
fluids (as are found in the human body) reduces these fields very
rapidly with distance. From Eqn. 3.20, the static field from a single
charged amino acid floating in human plasma falls from ~6 x 106
volts/m at a range of 1 nm to 0.7 volts/m at r = 10 nm. In plant
cells, photosynthetic “receivers” detect gradients in the electrochemical
potential of the order of 1 eV across distances on the order of 1 nm,
an instantaneous ~109
 volts/m.
The most important internal electrical sources are the electrochemical gradients caused by gated channel and transporter
molecular pump operations at the intracellular level; muscular,
membrane, digestive, and neural activity at the intercellular and
organ level (see also Section 4.9.3.1); and piezoelectric fields generated
by movement of collagenous tissues (e.g., tendon and elastin), bones,
and many other biological materials.1939–1942,3089–3095Typically these
sources generate potentials of 10-100 millivolts over distances of
0.01-10 microns, producing local fields in the range of 103
-107 volts/m.
For example, the 50 millivolt transmembrane potential necessary
to open a sodium channel corresponds to an electric field of 5 x 106
volts/m. (See also Section 4.8.7.) Interestingly, implanted electrical
devices such as pacemakers may produce up to 600 volts/m one
millimeter from the casing.
External sources may also contribute to detectable nanomedical
electric fields within the human body, though usually to a lesser
degree. Placing a hand flat between two plates charged to Ep = 3 x
106 volts/m (near the breakdown voltage for air) induces an instantaneous
field of E ~ Ep / κwater = 42,000 volts/m transversely through the
limb. (A DC field induces ion current flows which accumulate surface
charge and cancel out the internal field after ~one RC time.) Electric
fields directly beneath high-tension power lines are 2,000-11,000
volts/m, or 50-1000 volts/m at a lateral displacement of 25 meters
along the ground.477 Household appliances produce 200-300 volt/m
fields;477 20 amperes flowing through standard Romex copper wiring
in the walls of a house produces 100-600 volts/m in the middle of a
room, up to 24,000 volts/m at the wall (E = B / µ0 ε0 c; c = the
speed of light, B from Eqn. 4.44); static sparks from carpet walking
are ~10,000 volts/m, and ~105 volts/m makes hair stand on end.
Quiescent atmospheric charge is ~100 volts/m, rising to 5000 volts/m
during severe thunder-storms oscillating from positive to negative
over a ~10,000 volt/m range. Lightning bolts (~20 coul 0.002-sec
discharge) produce 60,000 volt/m spikes at a distance of 10 meters
from the strike, 600 volts/m at a range of 1 kilometer. Electronhole avalanches in semiconductors are initiated by fields  5 x 107
volts/m.129 Penal electrocutions use ~1500 volts/m. (See also Section
7.2.3.)
Direct force sensing of these electric fields is ineffective; from
Eqn. 4.40, the minimum detectable field Emin = Fmin / q = 6 x 107
volts/m using Fmin = 10 pN (Section 4.4.1) and a single-charge sensor.
Particle deflection seems more efficient. Consider a collimated stream
of singly-charged particles, each of mass m and initial velocity V0
entering an evacuated test chamber of length L and experiencing a
uniform electric field E, causing a lateral displacement ∆x = q E L2 /
2 m V0
2 measured by the sensor. For this measurement, SNR ~ ln
(m V0
2
 / 2 kT), so the minimum detectable electric field is

E 4 kT x e
q L min (volts/m) min
SNR
2 = ∆ {Eqn. 4.41}
For ∆xmin = 10 pm (Section 4.3.1), T = 310 K and SNR = 2,
Emin = 10,000 volts/m for a sensor of size L = 28 nm, or 100 volts/
m for L = 280 nm, allowing measurement of all nanomedically
relevant fields that are homogeneous across the entire device. Using
the larger 280-nm sensor, time of flight is ~10-12 sec for electrons or
~10-9 sec for U238 ions, permitting tmeas ~ 10-9 sec and dissipating at
least ~30 pW waste heat (due to kinetic impact) in continuous
operation. Time-varying electric fields can be measured up to
tmeas-1 ~ GHz frequencies, and electric current may be determined
using standard techniques because current density is scale-invariant.10
Care must be taken to eliminate measurement error due to exogenous
magnetic fields. Piezoelectric or other electromechanical transducers
can convert electricity into mechanical signals (Section 6.3.5)
appropriate for all-mechanical computation and control systems.
Another class of electric field detector of similar size and
sensitivity is the electrosensitive gel sensor. For example, the negatively
charged heparan sulfate proteoglycan network found in the secretory
granule matrix expands 50% in volume within milliseconds of
exposure to a -2 volt/micron field, and the response appears linear
with voltage.498 Thus the length of a 400-nm long gel-filled sensor
of fixed cross-sectional area should expand a minimally-detectable
10 pm (= ∆xmin) in a 100 volt/m field. Similar sensitivities to small
periodic fields, analogous to shark electroreceptors (maximum
sensitivity ~10-7 volts/m,813), are found in ion-channel embedded
*Heating and cooling rates during ultrasonic cavitation in water exceed ~109
 kelvins/sec.625
110 Nanomedicine • Volume I
artificial membranes that selectively amplify electric signals in noisy
environments via stochastic resonance.514 Stochastic resonance in
neurons permits detection of electric fields as weak as 10 volts/m.566
The theoretical limits have been analyzed by Weaver and
Astumian814 and by Block,810 who conclude that the minimum
detectable static field for a hollow spherical sensor of radius rsen and
shell membrane thickness dmem (capacitance Ce = 4 π ε0 κe rsen2
 /
dmem) is

E 2
3 r
kT d
4 minDC (volts/m)
sen
2
mem
0 e
1/2
= 







 

 πε κ
{Eqn. 4.42}
Using κe = 74.31 for water at T = 310 K, rsen = 0.5 micron and
dmem = 10 nm gives EminDC = 200 volt/m. Increasing rsen to 5 microns
reduces Emin to ~2 volts/m. To detect a periodic field of frequency
νe by sampling over (νe tmeas) cycles for a measurement time tmeas,
Block810 gives

E E
 t minAC (volts/m) minDC
e meas
1/2 =
( ) ν
{Eqn. 4.43}
Using νe = 1 MHz and tmeas = 1 sec gives EminAC = 0.2 volt/m.
Cylindrical sensors are 10-100 times more sensitive, and sensitivity
may possibly be further enhanced by coupling the periodic electric
potential to a Michaelis-Menten type enzyme or a similar
nanomechanism embedded in the sensor shell to achieve tuning.814
Fields as small as ~10-4 volts/m may be detectable by ~20-micron
mammalian living cells;814 such detection may trigger biochemical
observables which may be monitored or eavesdropped by resident
nanomedical devices. Submicron-scale electrometers capable of ~0.1
electrons/Hz1/2 (charge per unit bandwidth) have been demonstrated
experimentally, and also single-electron transistors (SETs) to 10-4
electron/Hz1/2, with the potential to reach 10-6 electron/Hz1/2 .
2926
Galvanotropic bacteria have been reported in the literature.3351
Radiofrequency receivers for power transmission and communication
in vivo are described in Sections 6.4.2 and 7.2.3. Antenna radiation
patterns may also be useful in diagnostics and macrosensing
applications (Section 7.2.3). Piezoelectric macrosensing of bone loads
is briefly described in Section 4.9.3.3.
4.7.2 Magnetic Fields
The most significant source of biomagnetic fields, generated by
electric charges moving as currents through the body, is neural
impulses. The magnetic field generated by these currents is given by
Ampere’s law as

B i
2 r
0 m = µ κ
π
{Eqn. 4.44}
where B is magnetic flux density (teslas), µ0 is the permeability
constant (~4π x 10-7 henry/m), relative permeability κm = 1 for most
biological materials and in vacuo, i is electric current (~0.2 microamperes for human nerve impulses), and r = distance from the currentcarrying conductor. Hence B ~ 0.04 microtesla for r = 1 micron,
adjacent to an axonal conductor. For comparison, magnetic fields
directly beneath high-tension power lines are 10-40 microtesla, or
2-8 microtesla at a lateral displacement of 25 meters along the
ground.477 Household appliances produce 1-1000 microtesla at a
distance of 3 cm and 0.01-2 microtesla at a 1-meter range477 (electric
shavers produce 0.4-60 microtesla at a range of 15 cm1294). 20-amp
Romex wiring in the walls of a house can produce 2 microtesla in
mid-room, up to 80 microtesla at the wall, though in 1998 the
average strength in 98% of U.S. homes from artificial sources was
0.05-0.09 microtesla, typical exposures throughout the day were
0.1-1 microtesla, and the federal workplace standard was a maximum
of 100 microtesla.1099 Magnetotactic marsh bacteria,501 birds and
insects502,503,1089 can detect the geomagnetic field vector (identifying
Earth’s magnetic poles), which is 30-70 microtesla, depending on
geographic position. Behavioral thresholds have been measured as
0.005-0.02 microtesla for pigeons and 0.001-0.01 microtesla for
honeybees,815,816 and no more than 1000-2000 microteslas for
human subjects.1130 Some biochemical changes have been observed
in human cells exposed to ~10-100 microtesla 60 Hz fields,477,1099
although the data are controversial; it appears the fields pump iron
atoms through cell membranes, potentially causing peroxidation or
other damage to occur. In 1998, transcranial magnetic stimulation
was used to expedite recovery of motor skills for stroke patients,
and was being explored as a treatment for depression and a means
of altering patient mood. Lightning bolts (i ~ 10,000 amp/discharge)
produce 200 microtesla spikes at a distance of 10 meters from the
strike, 2 microtesla at a range of 1 kilometer.
Computer simulations of a fully heterogeneous human body
divided into 37,000 (1.31 cm)3
 voxels produced a maximum induced
current of 8.84 amp/m2 (average ~1 amp/m2
) when the body was
exposed to a uniform 60 Hz 1-tesla magnetic field.930 Patients
undergoing Echo-Planar MRI scanning report “tickling” and “pain”
when exposed to field changes exceeding 60 tesla/sec; ventricular
fibrillation may result from myocardial current densities of 4 amp/
m2
, which is induced at 250 tesla/sec.490
The simplest magnetosensor is a freely pivoting permanent magnet
that experiences a restoring force when the magnet’s axis is not
aligned with the external field. This “compass effect” is also
employed by magnetotactic bacteria, which have ~0.1 micron
ferromagnets in magnetosomes in their cells that allow them to detect
and track the geomagnetic field vector.501,2330 Permanent magnets
of cross-sectional area Amagnet and length lmagnet made of Alnico or
Alcomax (ρ ~ 8000 kg/m3
) can provide Bmagnet ~ 1.4 tesla. (In 1998,
the record flux density was 13.5 tesla for dipole magnets,697 ~27
tesla for resistive magnets.1026) The force on such a magnet
immersed in an external field of flux B is F = B Bmagnet Amagnet / µ0,
so the minimum detectable flux Bmin is

B F
B A min 0 m min
magnet magnet
= µ κ {Eqn. 4.45}
If the minimum detectable force is Fmin = 10 pN (Section 4.4.1),
Bmin = 50 microtesla for Amagnet = 0.4 micron2
, about right for
magnetotactic bacteria, and Bmin = 2 microtesla for Amagnet = 2
micron2
.
The limitations of force sensing may be avoided by suspending
the bar magnet from its center of mass and allowing it to oscillate in
vacuo about its stable equilibrium position in the external field B,
making a simple harmonic oscillator with period

t 2
I
B B A l magnet
0 m mag
magnet magnet magnet
1/2
= 




 π
µ κ {Eqn. 4.46}
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 111
where the moment of inertia Imag = mmagnet ((Amagnet/4) + (lmagnet2
/12)).
Oscillator energy Em ~ B Bmagnet Amagnet lmagnet / µ0 κm, so the
minimum detectable external field is

B kT e
B A l min 0 m
SNR
magnet magnet magnet
= µ κ {Eqn. 4.47}
For Bmagnet = 1.4 tesla, Amagnet = (660 nm)2
, lmagnet = 660 nm, T = 310
K and SNR = 2, then Bmin = 0.1 microtesla and tmagnet = 6 x 10-4 sec
(~tmeas), allowing a ~KHz sampling frequency. Magnet mass mmagnet
~ 2 x 10-15 kg. Several classes of molecular magnets have been
described in the literature.2598-2600
Another class of magnetosensor detects the change in dimensions
when a magnetic body is magnetized, which is called magnetostriction.
For instance, iron-cobalt ferrite expands by ∆L / L ~ 7.5 x 10-4 at
saturation magnetostriction in a ~1 tesla field, permitting detection
of ~10 millitesla field changes using a 1 micron sensor and ∆xmin
~ 10 pm. Small magnetostrictive volume changes make possible
a sensor of even greater sensitivity. A field of ~0.2 tesla causes a
fractional volume increase of ~10-6 in iron and up to 40 x 10-6 in
some iron-nickel (~30% Ni) alloys. A (370 nm)3
 magnetostriction
sensor monitored by stretch sensors with displacement sensitivity
∆xmin = 0.1 nm (~1 atomic radius) can in theory detect Bmin ~ 0.1
microtesla. Magnetostriction is nonlinear with applied field, and
there are significant hysteresis effects which may confuse data
interpretation. However, multisensor arrays combining positiveand negative-magnetostriction materials should enhance signal
extraction. Since the change in volume is small, temperature compensation may be required.
Hall effect probe microscopes have demonstrated 10 microtesla
sensitivity with 350 nm spatial resolution,478 and alternative
nanoscale magnetic detectors such as direct-current SQUID
(superconducting quantum interference device) magnetometers,
stray field devices, and magnetic spin sensors are being developed.450
In 1999, microSQUID could measure magnetic moments as small
as ~104 Bohr magnetons3274 or ~10-19 J/tesla, roughly 7 x 106 protons
or a 14-nm iron cube. Magnetoencephalographs using SQUID
magnetometers to measure external electromagnetic fields produced
by neural traffic in the brain can register 10-6 - 10-3 microtesla
signals.810 Other biomagnetic measurement techniques have helped
to investigate electrophysiological disturbances in heart muscle and
in the brain.479 By 1998, microcoils as small as 100 microns in
diameter had been constructed using microcontact printing of 25
micron wide silver wires, producing magnetic flux densities >0.4 tesla
with a 10 milliamp current, switchable in <10-3 sec.1196
4.7.3 Optical Sensing
In biosystems and nanosystems alike, the detection of an optical
photon is a high-energy event. A single photon of red light at λ =
700 nm carries an energy of 280 zJ, a blue photon at 400 nm conveys
500 zJ, and an ultraviolet (UV) photon at 200 nm transmits 1000
zJ to its receptor. These energies, ranging from 65-234 kT, exceed
thermal noise by a wide margin, hence are all easily detectable reliably
by suitable nanosensors. Note that optical photon detection does
not require a nanosensor the size of one wavelength or larger—for
example, 1-nm chlorophyll molecules have no difficulty absorbing
660-nm photons.
Biological systems provide numerous examples of single-photon
transducers, including photopigment molecules such as chlorophyll
and rhodopsin which mediate electron transfers in 1 picosecond
by undergoing conformational changes,1692 triggering a series of
biochemical events. An estimated 100-500 cell membrane channels
are affected by the detection of a single optical photon. The first
documented case of a physiological role for chlorophyll in animals
has been found in the fish Malacosteus niger, which uses a chlorophyll
derivative to see far-infrared light.1528 Mammalian cells also act as
indirect UV sensors (e.g., see Section 10.4.2.3), as for instance when
energy absorption induces perturbations of membrane structure or
a conformational change in membrane proteins, activating the JNK
cascade below 300 pJ/micron2
,
481 and centrosomes may serve as
cellular directional IR sensors in single fibroblast cells.1960 Integration
times for photon sensors are briefly treated in Section 4.9.4.
Artificial “bioelectronic” cyanine-quinone chromophore molecules
~1 nm in size can detect optical photons of wavelengths λ = 580-630
nm, and can trigger and reset in 1-3 picosec (governed by the
tunneling times associated with reformation of the zwitterionic states
of the inputs21,480), in theory permitting ~100 GHz modulations
to be received. Exciton-generating poly(p-phenylene vinylene)
polymer switches have the potential to achieve ~THz switching
speed;733 a birefringent Kerr medium also switches in a few picoseconds. Chalcogenide glass has viscosity >1013 kg/m-sec in darkness,
but ~5 x 1011 kg/m-sec under illumination.1306 Proposals for specific
implementations of photoergic transducers (Section 6.3.6) and
optical cables (Sections 6.4.3.2 and 7.2.5.2) are elsewhere.
4.7.4 Particulate and High-Energy Radiation
High energy photons including x-rays (λ ~ 2 nm, ~105 zJ or
0.0001 picojoule) and gamma rays (λ ~ 0.002 nm, ~0.1 picojoule),
and ejecta from the decay of radioactive nuclei such as α-particles
(helium nuclei, ~1 picojoule) and β-particles (free electrons, 0.01-0.1
picojoule) may be extremely destructive to nanomechanical
systems (Chapter 13) and are difficult to reliably measure quantitatively. For example, a charged particle with 0.01 pJ of kinetic energy
(K.E.) traversing a decelerative electrostatic field of 109 volts/m
requires K.E./qE ~ 60 microns to slow to a halt. However, particle-induced visual sensations have been observed by dark-adapted
astronauts in space,504 and Ruderfer702 has suggested that even solar
neutrinos may be detectable by the human brain (though most
physicists would find this implausible). The nucleoelectric transducer
described in Section 6.3.7.1 could be adapted to serve as a directional
α particle sensor.
4.8 Cellular Bioscanning
The goal of cellular bioscanning is the noninvasive and nondestructive in vivo examination of interior biological structures. One
of the most common nanomedical sensor tasks is the scanning of
cellular and subcellular structures. Such tasks may include localization
and examination of cytoplasmic and nuclear membranes, as well as
the identification and diagnostic measurement of cellular contents
including organelles and other natural molecular devices, cytoskeletal
structures, biochemical composition and the kinetics of the cytoplasm.
The precision and speed of medical nanodevices is so great that
they can provide a surfeit of detailed diagnostic information well
beyond that which is normally needed in classical medicine for a
complete analysis of somatic status. Except in the most subtle cases
a malfunction in any one component of the cellular machinery
(Section 8.5) normally provokes a cascade of pathological observables
in many other subsystems. Detection of any one of these cascade
observables, if sufficiently unique and well-defined, may provide
adequate diagnostic information (see Chapter 18) to plan a proper
reparative procedure.
DNA is one of the few cellular components that is regularly
inspected and repaired. Most homeostatic systems adopt a more
simple philosophy of periodic replacement of components regardless
of functionality. Nanomedicine allows the philosophy of inspection
112 Nanomedicine • Volume I
and repair to be extended to all cellular components (Chapters 13
and 21). The following discussion briefly describes a few of the sensory
techniques that may be useful in achieving this objective.
4.8.1 Cellular Topographics
Tactile topographic scanning provides the most direct means for
examining cellular structures in vivo.484-486,2723-2727 For example,
ex vivo live cell scanning in air by commercially available atomic
force microscopy (AFM; Section 2.3.3) using a 20-40 nm radius tip
allows nondestructive feature resolutions of ~50 nm across the top
10 nm of the cell. Investigators have used the scanning tip to punch
a hole in the cell, then pull back and scan the breach, observing the
membrane heal itself via self-assembly in real time. Up to ~KHz
scanning frequencies are possible, with up to 1024 data points per
scan line. The nanomechanical manipulator arm described in
Section 9.3.1.4 achieves comparable tip velocities and positional
accuracies.
Assuming a scan rate of ~106 pixels/sec, a micron-scale
nanodevice, once securely anchored (Section 9.4.3.3) to the surface
of a (~20 micron)3 human cell, could employ a tactile scanning
probe to image the 0.1% of plasma membrane lying within its (1.4
micron)2 vicinity in ~2 sec to ~1 nm2 resolution (~1 mm/sec tip
velocity), or ~50 sec to ~0.2 nm (e.g., atomic) resolution (~0.2 mm/
sec tip velocity). Inside the cell, and again post-anchoring, an entire
6 micron2 mitochondrial surface could be imaged to atomic resolution
in ~100 sec; the surface of a 100-nm length of 25-nm diameter
microtubule could be atomically resolved in 0.2 sec—though of
course in a living cell these structures may be changing dynamically
during the scanning process. From Eqn. 5.5, continuous power
dissipation of a (0.1 micron)2 scan head moving at 1 mm/sec through
water is ~0.002 pW (~kT/pixel at ~106 pixels/sec), though of course
the energy cost of sensing, recording, and processing each pixel must
be at least ~10 kT/pixel (ignoring the possibility of pre-computational
image compression), so the total scanner power draw could be as
high as 0.02-0.1 pW in continuous operation. Special scanning tips
and techniques should allow topographic, roughness, elastic, adhesive,
chemical, electrostatic (charge density), conductance, capacitance,
magnetic, or thermal surface properties to be measured.
For large (~0.1-1 micron) cellular components, identification
and preliminary diagnosis of improper structure may be possible
using measured surface characteristics which may be matched to
entries in an extensive onboard library, perhaps combined with
dynamic monitoring of anomalies in cross-membrane molecular traffic
using chemical nanosensors. Most membranes are self-sealing, so it
should also be possible to gently insert a telescoping member into
the target organelle (Section 9.4.5), which member then slowly reticulates and extrudes smaller probes with sensory tips in a fixed
pattern and step size, allowing the acquisition of detailed internal
structural and compositional information.
Small (~1-10 nm) protein-based components of the cell such as
enzymes, MHC carriers, and ribosomes are self-assembling or require
only modest assistance (e.g., molecular chaperones) to self-assemble.
Reversible mechanical denaturation of these smaller proteins, using
diamondoid probe structure to displace water molecules (thus
reducing hydrophobic forces) and by using specialized handling tools
akin to functionalized AFM tips and molecular clamps, may be
followed by precise nondestructive amino acid sequencing (Chapter
20) to allow identification and diagnostic compositional analysis.
Afterward, the protein molecule may be refolded back into its original
minimum-energy conformation, possibly with the assistance of
chaperone-like structures in some cases.3045
4.8.2 Transcellular Acoustic Microscopy
Acoustic microscopy is another noninvasive scanning technique
that can provide nanomedically useful spatial resolutions. Frequencies
are in the GHz range, far exceeding the relaxation time of the
protoplasm. A cryogenic acoustic microscope operated at 8 GHz
has demonstrated 20 nm lateral resolution in liquid helium.482 By
1998, the best resolution achieved with water as the coupling fluid
has been 240 nm at a frequency of 4.4 GHz.488 Operated in water
at 310 K, a nanomechanical 1.5 GHz acoustic microscope would
achieve a far-field minimum lateral resolution λ/2 ~ 500 nm, ~105
voxels per human cell, sufficient to locate and count all major
organelles and a few intermediate-scale structures. Scanning acoustic
microscopes (SAM) operated at 2 GHz in reflection mode (which
allows detection of interference effects) achieve 30-50 nm resolution
in the direction of the acoustical axis, and the Subtraction SAM
approach reveals topographical deviations of 7.5 nm at 1 GHz.483
It has been proposed that picosecond ultrasonics could be used to
obtain an image of the cytoskeleton with detail comparable to that
of conventional x-ray images of a human skeleton.1022
Power requirements are a significant constraint on acoustic
reflection microscopy (echolocation). In the simplest case, consider
an acoustic emitter of radius rE which converts an input power of
Pin into acoustic power of intensity IE  Imax = 1000 watts/m2 (Section
6.4.1) with efficiency e%, conservatively taken here to be 0.50
(50%). The emitter produces a train of omnidirectional pressure
pulses of amplitude Ap = (2 ρ vsound IE)
1/2 (N/m2
) (Eqn. 4.53) and
frequency ν which travels a distance Xpath to a target of radius rT. As
the signal reaches the target, its amplitude has been reduced by (rE /
Xpath) due to the 1/r2 dependence of intensity in spherical waves
(Section 4.9.1.5) and by e-αtiss ν Xpath by attenuation (Eqn. 4.52)
with αtiss = 8.3 x 10-6 sec/m for soft tissue.
Upon reaching the target, a fraction freflect of the signal is
reflected as a point source echo; if the target surface has an acoustic
impedance similar to liver tissue and the medium is similar to water,
then from Eqn. 4.54 and Table 4.3, freflect ~ 0.05 (5%). The echo
then travels a distance Xpath back to a receiver (which may or may
not be located near the emitter), the amplitude again losing (rT /
Xpath) by geometry and e-αtiss ν Xpath by attenuation. The echo is
finally detected by the receiver which can measure a pulse of minimum
pressure amplitude ∆Pmin ~ 10-6 atm (Section 4.5.1).
Combining these relations gives the following result:
{Eqn. 4.48}
To scan the entire interior of a (20 micron)3
 cell, whether from
within or without, requires Xpath  20 microns. A frequency of ν =
1.5 GHz allows vsound/ν ~ 1 micron spatial resolution. The fastest
possible pulse repetition time is Xpath/vsound ~ 13 nanosec. Assuming rE
= rT = 0.5 micron, Pin ~ 7 pW or ~5 watts/m2
, well within the safe
intensity range for acoustic radiation (Section 6.4.1). At maximum
safe transmitter intensity Imax, the longest scannable path length at
1.5 GHz is Xpath ~ 46 microns.
Power constraints are somewhat less severe in the case of acoustic
transmission microscopy (acoustic tomography), a technique which
requires a minimum of two physically separated components (e.g.,
a transmitter and a receiver). Consider an acoustic emitter radiating
a series of omnidirectional pressure pulses of frequency ν which
travel across a tissue cell of width Xpath, to be detected by a receiver
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 113
on the other side after a signal transit time tcell ~ Xpath / vcell, where
vcell is the speed of sound in the cytosol. In the simplest case,
assume that the cytosol is clear except for one target of interest along
the path (e.g., an organelle) in which the speed of sound is vtarget 
vcell. The minimum detectable difference in travel times between a
signal that passes through the target and one that does not is
∆t (~10-9 sec for diamondoid systems), so the minimum resolvable
target size is rmin ~ vtarget vcell ∆t / 2 abs(vtarget - vcell) when rmin  vcell
/ ν. For soft tissue targets in water at 1.5 GHz, rmin ~ 30 microns;
for tooth enamel in water (see Table 6.7), rmin ~ 1 micron. However, the use of sampling gates will permit the detection of phase
shifts that are much less than the characteristic time constant of the
system in incoming waves, hence the minimum thickness of objects
in theory detectable by acoustic tomography can be far smaller than
the values for rmin estimated above.
Computing acoustic tomographic power requirement Pin in a
similar manner as for echolocation, except that the transmitted signal
rather than the echo is detected and assuming the signals are of
approximately equal strength regardless of the path taken, gives:
{Eqn. 4.49}
Using the same values as the previous example, Pin = 1 pW for Xpath
~ 45 microns; for Xpath ~ 140 microns, Pin = 1000 pW, near Imax.
In either mode of operation, data gathering is accelerated by
positioning more than one receiver around the target. Sensitivity is
boosted by increasing emitter size, taking multiple measurements,
or by illuminating the target with some large external source
located elsewhere in the tissue or even outside of the organ. However,
cells and body tissues are mesoscopic “junkyards”—highly heterogeneous media which may produce large numbers of nontarget
scattering events, thus increasing the difficulty of extracting signal
from noise. Additional complications arise due to:
1. scattering on rough surfaces;
2. rapid pressure variations with range in the Fresnel zone or near
field of the transmitted signal;
3. cytoplasmic viscosity inhomogeneities due to the asymmetric
arrangement of cytoskeletal structure, granules, vacuoles, and
the endomembrane system; and
4. variation in cytoplasmic Young’s modulus due to time-varying
tensions in semirandomly-distributed cytosolic fibrillar elements
(e.g., a relaxed or contracted state) which alter elasticity and
thus the local speed of sound.
4.8.3 Magnetic Resonance Cytotomography
Electrostatic scanning is largely ineffective because of DebyeHuckel shielding (Section 4.7.1). Magnetic stray field probes
allow resolution of 10 nm physical features, but only for materials with
substantial magnetic domains—which most biological substances
lack. But nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) imaging2181 may
allow cellular tomography by creating 3-D proton (hydrogen
atom) density maps.451,489 Atomic density maps of other biologically important elements with nonzero nuclear magnetic
moments (including D, Li6
, B10, B11, C13, N14, N15, O17, F19,
Na23, Mg25, P31, Cl35, K39, Fe57, Cu63 and Cu65)
396,3257 may also be
compiled. For example, sodium imaging is already used clinically to
assess brain damage in patients with strokes, epilepsy, and
tumors.
In a hypothetical NMR cytotomographic nanoinstrument, a large
permanent magnet is positioned near the surface of the cell or
organelle to be examined. This creates a large static background
magnetic field that polarizes the protons. The spatial gradient of
this field establishes a unique resonant frequency, called the Larmor
frequency, within each isomagnetic surface throughout the test
volume. A second time-varying magnetic driver field (e.g., vibrating
permanent magnet or weak rf field) is then scanned through the full
range of resonant frequencies, exciting into resonance the protons
(nuclear spins) in each isomagnetic surface, in turn. Depending on
the sensor implementation chosen, each resonance detected may
cause absorption of driver field energy, an increase in measured
impedance, or even a return echo of magnetic energy (if the driver
field is operated in pulse echo mode) as the excited protons relax to
equilibrium in ~1 sec.490The large polarizing magnet is then rotated to
a new orientation, moving the isomagnetic surfaces to new positions
within the test volume, and the scan is repeated. A 3-D map of the
spatial proton distribution may be computed after several scan cycles.
Only those regions within a linewidth of resonance ∆B will
generate an appreciable signal, and the expected spatial resolution
(say, along the z-axis) ∆z = ∆B / (dB/dz), where dB/dz is the spatial
flux gradient of B. For a polarizing field B = 1.4 tesla placed adjacent to
a (20 micron)3 cell, the cross-cell gradient dB/dz ~ 7 x 104 tesla/m;
placed next to a (1 micron)3 organelle, dB/dz ~ 1.4 x 106 tesla/m.
Assuming an effective NMR linewidth ~ 0.002 tesla,489 minimum
spatial resolutions are 29 nm and 1.4 nm, respectively.
Unfortunately, the smallest reliably detectable energy in the sensor
element is ~ kT eSNR. The energy required to flip a single proton is
Eflip = 4 π νL Lproton, where Lproton = 5.28 x 10-35 joule-sec (the
quantized spin angular momentum of the proton) and the Larmor
resonance frequency νL = γproton B; γproton is the gyromagnetic ratio
(4.26 x 107 Hz/tesla for protons) and B is the polarizing magnetic
flux. However, the population difference between spin-up and spindown nuclei in NMR is very small. For small energy differences, the
Boltzmann distribution only allows a fraction Eflip / 2 kT to be
flipped before the upper and lower state populations are made equal
and the absorption disappears. In order to flip Nflip ~ kT eSNR / 4 π νL
Lproton protons, the sample volume must include at least:

N ~ 2 e kT
4 L min (protons) SNR
L proton
2
π ν





 {Eqn. 4.50}
For T = 310 K, SNR = 2 and B = 1.4 tesla, νL = 60 MHz and
Nmin ~ 1.7 x 1011 protons.
When scanning a cell or organelle, the vast majority of the protons
present are in water molecules (Table 3.2). Water at 310 K has a
proton density nwater = 6.7 x 1028 protons/m3
, compared to nfat ~
6.4 x 1028 protons/m3 (palmitic acid). Distinguishing fat from water
thus requires a minimum sample volume of Nmin / (nwater - nfat) ~55
micron3
.
Proteins range from 4.4 x 1028 protons/m3 (aspartic acid minus
one water) to 7.6 x 1028 protons/m3 (leucine minus one water),
average nprotein ~ 5.6 x 1028 protons/m3
; ncarbohydrate ~ 5.8 x 1028
protons/m3 (glucose minus one water), allowing NMR cellular
tomography to resolve minimum feature sizes of 2-4 microns (5 - 60
micron3
). This resolution may include intracellular structures such as
the endoplasmic reticulum (rough ER ~1100 micron3
, smooth ER
~400 micron3
), the Golgi complex (~500 micron3
), the nucleus
(~270 micron3
), possibly the nucleolus (~50 micron3
) (Table 8.17),
and even large localized ferritin granule concentrations.
114 Nanomedicine • Volume I
In 1998, the minimum sample size for microcoil (~470 micron
diameter) NMR scanning was ~10,000 micron3 or ~1016 protons
for a 1-minute measurement cycle.1061 Individual T-cell vacuoles
~1 micron in diameter labeled with dextran-coated iron oxide particles
have been imaged by MRI.2317
4.8.4 Near-Field Optical Nanoimaging
Electromagnetic waves of optical wavelength λ that interact with
an object are diffracted into two components, called “far-field” and
“near-field.” The propagation of electromagnetic radiation over
distances z > λ acts as a spatial filter of finite bandwidth, resulting
in the familiar diffraction-limited resolution ~λ/2.492 Classical optics
is concerned with this far-field regime with low spatial frequencies
< 2/λ, and conventional optical imaging will be difficult at the cellular
level in vivo (Section 4.9.4). (Short-wave x-rays will damage living
biological cells.) Information about the high spatial frequency
components of the diffracted waves is lost in the far-field regime, so
information about sub-wavelength features of the object cannot be
retrieved in classical microscopy.
However, for propagation over distances z << λ, far higher spatial
frequencies can be detected because their amplitudes are then of the
same order as the sample (z = 0). This second diffraction component is
the “near-field” evanescent waves with high spatial frequencies > 2/λ.
Evanescent waves are confined to subwavelength distances from the
object. Thus a localized optical probe, such as a subwavelength
aperture in an opaque screen, can be scanned raster fashion in this
regime to generate an image with a resolution on the order of the
probe size.
The original Near-field Scanning Optical Microscope (NSOM)
surpassed the classical diffraction limit by operating an optical probe
at close proximity to the object. The NSOM probe uses an aluminumcoated “light funnel” scanned over the sample. Visible light emanates
from the narrow end (~20 nm in diameter) of the light funnel and
either reflects off the sample or travels through the sample into a
detector, producing a visible light image of the surface with ~12 nm
resolution at λ = 514.5 nm492 provided the distance between light
source and sample is very short, about 5 nm, with signal intensities
up to 1011 photons/sec (~50 nanowatts). This represents a resolution
of ~λ/40. The near-field acoustic equivalent is found in the medical
stethoscope, which exhibits a resolution of ~λ/100.576
Applications include dynamical studies at video scanning rates,
low-noise high-resolution spectroscopy, and differential absorption
measurements. Optical imaging of individual dye molecules has
already been demonstrated,3195,3196 with the ability to determine
the orientation and depth of each target molecule located within
~30 nm of the scanned surface.493 Molecules with nanometer-scale
packing densities have been resolved to ~0.4-nm diameters using
STMs to create photon emission maps494 (an electric current generates
photons in the sample), and laser interferometric NSOMs have
produced clear optical images of dispersed oil drops on mica to ~1
nm resolution.495 Live specimen 250-nm optical sectioning for threedimensional dynamic imaging has also been demonstrated.496
Submicron laser emitters have been available since the late
1980s.497 It should be possible to use NSOM-like nanoprobes to
optically scan the surfaces of cells or organelles to 1 nm resolution,
mapping their topography and spectroscopic characteristics to depths
of tens of nanometers without penetrating the surface. However, a
proper membrane-sealing invasive light funnel ~20 nm in diameter
might not seriously disrupt some cellular or organelle membranes
and thus could be inserted into the interiors of these bodies or
through the cytoskeletal interstices to permit deeper volumetric
scanning. The thermal conductivity of water at 310 K is 0.623 watts/
m-K and the energy per 500-nm photon is 400 zJ, so for 1 micron3
of watery tissue the maximum scan rate is ~35 micron3
/sec-K, if
eSNR photons are used to image each 1 nm3 voxel with SNR = 2.
Thus a 1-sec volumetric optical scan of an aqueous ~1-micron3
sample volume to 1 nm3 resolution requires a ~1 nanowatt scanner
running at ~GHz bit rates, raising sample volume temperature by
~0.03 K.
NSOM permits the determination of five of the six degrees of
freedom for each molecule, lacking only the optically inactive rotation
around the dipole axis.493 In principle, it should be possible to produce
 1 nm resolution near-field optical scans of in situ protein
molecules, since with atomically precise fabrication and single lines
of atoms as conductors a minimum light guide (metal-dielectricmetal) is 3 atoms wide. Given a molecular laser990 and adequate
collimation, photons passing through folded proteins will scatter
according to the molecular structure. Detection of sufficient photons
comprising these scattering patterns should allow the noninvasive
determination of protein structure; polarized photons provide
information on chirality. Absorption and fluorescent signals will be
visible from phenyl rings, tryptophan, and bound cofactors such as
ATP and adenine (which is fluorescent). Positions of monoclonal
antibodies on virus surfaces are now identifiable experimentally
using NSOM;1258 it should be possible to map binding sites on
virus and cell surfaces using fluorescently labelled antibodies. Single
molecule detection has been proposed as a tool for rapid basesequencing of DNA991,992 (Chapter 20).
Other optically-based cellular imaging techniques must be
distinguished. Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) uses
Michelson interferometry to achieve ~10 micron spatial resolutions
over tissue depths of 2-3 mm in nontransparent tissue in the near
infrared.736 However, OCT requires numerous physical components
not easily implemented on a micron-size detector (e.g., beam splitter,
lens-grating pair, galvanometer mirror, optical prism), femtosecond
pulse shaping, and illumination power levels of ~107 watts/m2 >>
100 watts/m2 “safe” continuous limit in tissue (Section 6.4.2).
Bioluminescence techniques in which the light source is placed
inside the tissue (e.g., a transgenic mouse with a luciferase gene in
every cell of its body) has a spatial resolution limited to ~10% of
the depth, or ~10 microns resolution at a ~100 micron depth.737
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) already permits
organelle imaging in living cells and can in theory create a pointby-point chemical map of a cell using two intersecting lasers.3239
Three-dimensional observation of microscopic biological nonliving structures by means of x-ray holography requires a high degree of
spatial coherence and good contrast between target and surroundings.
Good contrast may be achieved in the wavelength range between
the K absorption edges of carbon (λ = 4.37 nm) and oxygen (λ
= 2.33 nm), the “water window” where carbon-containing biological
objects absorb radiation efficiently but water is relatively transparent.988
A 50-micron diameter emitter has been tested that uses near-IR
5-femtosecond laser pulses impinging upon a helium gas target to
create a well-collimated (<1 milliradian) beam of coherent soft x-rays
at a 1 KHz repetition rate producing a brightness of 5 x 108
photons/mm2
-milliradian2
-sec, a peak x-ray intensity of >1010 watts/
m2
 on the propagation axis behind the He target.988
4.8.5 Cell Volume Sensing
Many cellular parameters need not be measured directly in order to
be detected by a medical nanodevice. Cell volume sensing is a case
in point.1198 An intracellular nanodevice can indirectly monitor
changes in the volume of the cell in which it resides by one of two
methods. First, measurements of the mechanical deformation of the
cellular membrane, stretch-activated channels, or cytoskeletal strains
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 115
and structural changes are quite sensitive to alterations in total cell
volume. Second, concentration or dilution of the cytoplasmic
environment through cell shrinkage or swelling leads to the activation
of various volume-regulation responses which may be detected by
the nanorobot. Changes in the concentration of soluble cytosolic
proteins may nonspecifically affect enzyme activity via “macromolecular crowding”491 (and see Section 8.5.3.3). Minor changes
in cell volume can cause severalfold changes in ion transport. Cellular
signalling entities that have been linked to the transduction and
amplification of the primary volume signal include Ca++ transients,
phosphoinositide turnover, eicosanoid metabolism, kinase/phosphatase
systems such as JNK and p38, cAMP, and G-proteins.491 These signal
amplification pathways may be monitored using chemical
concentration sensors aboard the medical nanodevice, allowing the
nanorobot to eavesdrop (Section 7.4.5.2) on the natural sensory
channel traffic of the cell.
4.8.6 Noninvasive Neuroelectric Monitoring
In many ways the neuron is the most nanomedically important
class of cell in the human body. Nanomedical applications regarding
neurons and the brain are addressed in Chapter 25. The following
is a brief summary of noninvasive (i.e., no axonal membrane
penetration) nanotechnological methods for monitoring the electrical
traffic of individual neurons. Noninvasive measurement of axonal
traffic within nerve bundles will require multiple sensors and greater
sensitivity to compensate for shielding by the perineurium, a tight
resistive sheath enclosing the bundle ~20 microns thick with resistivity
~4000 ohm-cm.
4.8.6.1 Electric Field Neurosensing
The “typical” ~20 micron human neuron discharges 5-100 times
per second, moving from -60 mV potential to +30 mV potential in
~10-3 sec. Thus the variation in electric field at the axonal surface is
± 4500 volts/m. Since electric field sensors can detect 100 volt/m
fields up to GHz frequencies (Section 4.7.1), an electric sensor
attached by circumaxonal cuff or pressed against the axonal surface
(possibly at the node of Ranvier) should readily detect each action
potential discharge. (The diameter of human nerve axons is 0.1-20
microns.799) By 1998 silicon-to-neuron extracellular junctions
already permitted direct stimulation of individual nerve cells in vitro
without killing the cells,513 and extracellular electrodes were commonly
used to detect neuronal electrical activity noninvasively, both in
vivo573 and in vitro.572,574,575 Artificial electric fields may also be
employed to trigger or moderate neural signals (Section 7.4.5.6).
Cell membrane capacitance is typically ~0.01 picofarads/micron2
,
2288
and varies with the state of the health of the cell.2289,2290
4.8.6.2 Magnetic Field Neurosensing
The magnetic flux density caused by a single action potential
discharge is ~0.1 microtesla at the axonal surface, which may be
detected by a “compass oscillator” type magnetosensor with a ~KHz
maximum sampling rate (Section 4.7.2).
It might be possible for artificial magnetic fields to directly
influence neural transmissions. Even a static 65 millitesla field has
been shown to reduce frog skin Na+ transport by 10-30%.500 Each
neuronal discharge develops an electrical energy of ~20 picojoule
(~1010 kT), far smaller than the magnetic energy stored in a B = 1.4
tesla field of a permanent micromagnet traversing an L3 = (20 micron)3
volume which from Eqn. 6.9 is B2
 L3 / 2 µ0 ~ 6000 pJ. If properly
manipulated, such a field may be sufficient to enhance, modulate,
or extinguish a passing neural signal.
4.8.6.3 Neurothermal Sensing
While neurons come in many shapes and sizes (Chapter 25),
our “exemplar” ~14,000-micron3 neuron discharging ~90 mV into
an input impedance of ~500 Kohms produces ~0.2 microampere
current per pulse and generates a continuous (average) 100-300 pW
of waste heat as measured experimentally (Table 6.8). The discharge
rate of 5-100 Hz can produce brief surges up to ~2000 pW during
a high-frequency train, but the duty cycle of such trains is far less
than 100%, reducing time-averaged dissipation to the observed
100-300 pW range.
Single impulses are measured experimentally to produce 2-7
microkelvin temperature spikes in cold or room-temperature
mammalian non-myelinated nerve fibers801 and ~23 microkelvins
in non-myelinated garfish olfactory nerve fibers3482 at an energy
density ranging from 270-1670 joules/m3-impulse from
0-20˚C.3483-3485 In non-myelinated fibers the initial heat occurs in
two temperature-dependent phases: a burst of positive heat, followed
by rapid heat reabsorption (called the negative heat).3484 The positive
heat derives from the dissipation of free energy stored in the membrane
capacity, and from the decrease in entropy of the membrane dielectric
with depolarization.3483,3484 An L ~ 20-micron neuron in good
thermal contact with an aqueous heat sink at 310 K has thermal
conductance L Kt ~ 10-5 watts/K, so trains of 5-100 Hz impulses
lasting 1 second should raise cellular temperature by
10-30 microkelvins; up to ~200 microkelvin thermal spikes from
such trains have been observed experimentally.801 These events are
easily detectable by nanoscale thermal sensors capable of ~1
microkelvin sensitivity up to ~1 KHz (Section 4.6.3). The
~microkelvin heat signature of individual impulses or very short pulse
trains can probably be temporally resolved because the minimum
pulse repetition time is ~10 millisec (at 100 Hz) which is much
longer than the thermal time constant for an L ~ 20-micron neuron
(thermal conductivity Kt = 0.528 watts/m-K and heat capacity CV
= 3.86 x 106
 joules/m3
-K for brain tissue; Table 8.12) which is tEQ
~ L2
 CV / Kt ~ 3 millisec.
4.8.6.4 Direct Synaptic Monitoring
The synaptic cleft between the axonal presynaptic terminal and
the dendritic postsynaptic membrane is 10-20 nm in most synapses,
although in the vertebrate myoneural junction it may be as large as
100 nm. Contact area per bouton is ~1 micron2
, giving a total gap
volume of ~107
-108 nm3
. The density of acetylcholine receptors is
highest in muscles along the crests and upper thirds of the junctional
folds (~10,000/micron2
), and is lowest in the extrasynaptic regions
(~5/micron2
).802 (Other neurotransmitters exist; Table 7.2 and
Section 7.4.5.6.) Each action potential discharge triggers the release of
~104
-105 molecules of acetylcholine into the gap volume of an active
neuromuscular junction (diffusion time ~1 microsec), raising cligand from
near zero to ~3 x 10-4 molecules/nm3 (~0.0005 M)531 in ~1 millisec,
followed by near-complete hydrolyzation by acetylcholinesterase
during the 1-2 millisec refractory period. Into the gap volume may
easily be inserted a ~105 nm3 neurotransmitter concentration sensor
(Section 4.2.3) able to measure ~100 acetylcholine molecules in ~1
millisec (Eqn. 4.5), thus detecting pulses at the fastest discharge rate. A
similar device could be used to precisely regulate neuro-transmitter
concentration at the junction, and hence the neural signal itself, under
nanodevice control (Section 7.4.5.6). Simple electrochemical and
mechanochemical artificial synapses have been demonstrated.499
4.8.6.5 Other Neurosensing Techniques
Many other noninvasive neurosensing techniques are readily
conceivable. For instance, counting rotors (Section 3.4.2) or sodium
116 Nanomedicine • Volume I
magnetic resonance imaging (Section 4.8.3) could detect changes
in the ionic composition (e.g., Na+
, K+
) of the periaxonal fluid before,
during, and after discharge.
4.8.7 Cellular RF and Microwave Oscillations
Starting in 1968, H. Frohlich, observing that millivolt electrical
potentials maintained across cell membranes ~10 nm thick give rise
to huge fields ~107 volts/m (Section 4.7.1) possibly producing an
electret state, theorized that membrane molecules must be highly
electrically polarized and thus could interact to produce coherent
surface acoustic vibrational modes in the 10-100 GHz (microwave)
frequency range;680,681 the longest wavelength is about twice the
membrane thickness. Interestingly, this frequency span is very close
to the maximum trigger/reset frequency for bioelectronic molecules
(Section 4.7.3). Note that (~100 mV) (1.6 x 10-19 coul) ~ 4 kT, so
a membrane molecule with a single charge on either end should be
reliably reoriented by a depolarization wave, coupling pressure waves
and electrostatic field fluctuations. However, the direct detection of
10-100 GHz millimeter radiation by non-nanotechnological means
is experimentally difficult and controversial because the tests must
be performed in vivo in close proximity to an actively metabolizing
cell in water—and water strongly absorbs microwaves over
macroscale ranges (e.g., ~99% absorption in 3 mm at 100 GHz).
Nevertheless, active cells have shown enhanced Raman antiStokes scattering, an effect ascribed to the converse of the Frohlich
oscillations. In one study, the normalized growth rate of yeast cultures
was enhanced or inhibited when irradiated by CW microwave fields
of ~30 watts/m2 of various frequencies; growth rate data spanning
62 separate runs revealed a repeatable frequency-dependent spectral
fine structure with six distinct peaks of width ~10 MHz near 42
GHz.682 Investigations of related phenomena are ongoing and
voluminous; the interested reader should peruse Bioelectromagnetics,
the archival journal of this field.
From Eqn. 6.32, 100 GHz waves attenuate only ~1% after passing
through ~3 microns of soft tissue. A single electron injected into an
integral membrane protein could act as an oscillating dipole, making a
300 volt/m signal 10 nm from the protein antenna with an energy
transfer of ~0.004 kT per cycle;686 ~1000 oscillating electrons could
produce a measurable field. A 20-micron diameter cell modeled as
a nonuniform spherical dipole layer with transmembrane dipoles
located 10 nm apart and embedded in a dissipative medium could
produce 102
-105 volt/m microwave fields 1-10 microns from the
cell surface.687
Thus, a variety of rf and microwave electromagnetic emanations
may in theory be detectable both within and nearby living cells
which could prove diagnostic of numerous internal states. Such states
may include cytoskeletal dynamics,684 metabolic rates,682 plasmontype excitations due to the collective motion of ions freed in chemical
reactions,688 positional, rotational or conformational changes in
biological macromolecules and membranes,680,721 internal movements
of organelles and nerve traffic conduction,685 cellular pinocytosis,1938
cellular reproduction events,683 cell membrane identity (e.g.,
distinguishing erythrocyte, Gram-positive and Gram-negative cell
coat conductivities at 10 KHz728), and cell-cell interactions.687,688
4.9 Macrosensing
Macrosensing is the detection of global somatic states (inside
the human body) and extrasomatic states (sensory data originating
outside the human body). While the treatment here is necessarily
incomplete, the discussion nevertheless gives a good feel for the kinds
of environmental variables that internally-situated nanodevices could
sense. Not all capabilities outlined here need be available on every
nanorobot, since injection of a cocktail of numerous distinct but
mutually cooperative machine species allows designers to take full
advantage of the benefits of functional specialization. In many cases,
a given environmental variable can be measured by several different
classes of sensor device. However, since these devices are microscopic
it is in theory possible to operationalize almost all of the macrosensing
capabilities described below in one patient using just a billion devices
(~10 mm-3 whole-body deployment density), a total volume of
~1 mm3 of nanorobots or ~0.1% of the typical ~1 cm3 therapeutic
dose1400 (Chapter 19).
A general discussion of methods for communicating
macrosensory information to the human user is in Section 7.4.6,
and is mentioned briefly in Section 4.9.5 below.
4.9.1 Acoustic Macrosensing
4.9.1.1 Cyto-Auscultation
Can sounds generated by a single cell be detected, and thus be
useful for diagnosis? Probably not, given that low frequency acoustic
radiators are notoriously inefficient (Section 7.2.2.1). For example,
mitochondrion organelles of the giant amoeba Reticulomyxa are
shuttled back and forth by 1-4 cytoplasmic dynein motors while
riding on the outside of a bundle of 1-6 microtubules.453 Each dynein
motor generates 2.6 pN of force and drives the mitochondria at up
to ~10 micron/sec, developing 0.3-1.0 x 10-16 watts of mechanical
power within each 320-nm diameter organelle. Taking each organelle
as a cylindrical acoustic radiator with a mechanical input power of
Pin ~ 10-16 watts at ν ~ 1000 Hz, the output acoustic pressure at the
organelle surface is only ~10-9 atm (Eqn. 7.6), an acoustic power
intensity I ~ 10-15 watts/m2 (Eqn. 4.53) which is not detectable by
micron-sized nanorobots. Nevertheless, cells and intracellular elements
are capable of vibrating in a dynamic manner with complex
harmonics that can be altered by growth factors and by the process
of carcinogenesis,1201 so the possibility cannot be completely ruled out.
4.9.1.2 Blood Pressure and Pulse Detection
Blood pressure ranges from 0.1-0.2 atm in the arteries to as low
as 0.005 atm in the veins. The systolic/diastolic differential ranges
from 0.05-0.07 atm in the aorta and 0.01-0.02 atm in the pulmonary
artery, falling to 0.001-0.003 atm in the microvessels, or 0.003-0.005
atm if the precapillary sphincter is dilated.361,363 In venous vessels,
pulse fluctuations are 0.002-0.010 atm in the superior vena cava,
0.004-0.006 atm in the subclavian vein, ~0.004 atm in venules
generally, and ~0.0005 atm in the brachial vein.361 There is also a
~0.05 Hz random fluctuation in the microvessels with amplitude
on the order of 0.004-0.007 atm.363 Both blood pressure and pulse
rate can be reliably monitored by a medical nanodevice virtually
anywhere in the vascular system using a (68 nm)3 pressure sensor
with ~0.001 atm sensitivity (Section 4.5.1). (See also Section 8.4.2.)
Pulse propagation through body tissue is somewhat muted due
to absorption in compressible fatty membranes, but most cells lie
within 1-3 cell-widths of a capillary so the cardiac acoustic signal
should still be measurable using more sensitive detectors. The timeaveraged interstitial pressure in subcutaneous tissue is 0.001-0.004
atm.363
Arterial pulse waves (vascular oscillations) carry subtle messages
about the health of internal organs and the arterial tree. The idea of
using pulse waves for diagnosis has a long history dating back 2000
years in China. For example, in the Book on Pulse Waves by Wang
Shu-He (201-285 AD), waves detected by manual probing are
classified using such subjective and qualitative descriptors as floating,
deep, hidden, rapid, slow, moderate, feeble, replete, full, thready,
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 117
faint, weak, soft, slippery, hesitant, hollow, firm, long, short, swift,
running, intermittent, uneven, taut, string-tight, gigantic, or
tremulous.361 Abnormal waves were empirically related to disease
states. Wave data gathered by nanodevices could make possible a
theoretically sound, quantitative system of noninvasive observation,
classification, and diagnosis as a supplement to other nanomedical tools.
4.9.1.3 Respiratory Audition
The variation of mechanical pressure over a complete respiratory
cycle is ~0.003 atm in the pleura, ~0.002 atm at the alveoli, detectable
by nanomedical pressure sensors positioned in the vicinity of the
respiratory organs. Holding a deep breath further stretches the
pulmonary elastic tissue, up to 0.02 atm.
However, turbulent flows at Reynolds number NR > 2300 in the
trachea, main bronchus and lobar bronchus produce a whooshing
noise that may be the loudest noncardiac sound in the human torso
during conventional auscultation. The energy dissipation for
turbulent flow in a tube is

P P Z 8 v L Z (watts) turb lam air
2 = = π η {Eqn. 4.51}
where Plam is the dissipation for laminar (Poiseuillean) flow in a
long circular cylindrical tube of length L, v is the mean flow velocity,
and turbulence factor Z = 0.005 (NR
3/4 - (2300)3/4), a well-known
empirical formula.363 For ηair = 1.83 x 10-5 kg/m-sec for roomtemperature air (20˚C), Pturb = 0.87 milliwatts for the trachea (L =
0.12 m, v = 3.93 m/sec and NR = 4350 at 1 liter/sec volume flow;
Table 8.7); Pturb = 0.66 milliwatts for the main bronchus (L = 0.167
m, v = 4.27 m/sec and NR = 3210); and Pturb = 0.09 milliwatts for
the lobar bronchus (L = 0.186 m, v = 4.62 m/sec and NR = 2390),
totalling ~1.6 milliwatts acoustic emission from a ~120 cm3
 upper
tracheobroncheal volume. This is a power density of 13 watts/m3
corresponding to a pressure of 4 x 10-5 atm assuming a 300 millisecond measurement window at the maximum respiration rate.
The amplitude of an acoustic plane wave propagating through
tissue attenuates exponentially with distance due to absorption,
scattering and reflection. The amplitude is given approximately by

A Ae x 0
 F x = −α {Eqn. 4.52}
where A0 is the initial wave amplitude in atm, Ax is the amplitude a
distance x from the source, and α is the amplitude absorption
coefficient. The function F expresses the frequency dependence of
the attenuation. For pure liquids, F = Fliq = ν2 (Hz2
); for example,
αliq = 2.5 x 10-14 sec2
/m for water at room temperature. However,
for soft tissues, F = Ftiss ~ ν (Hz).505* Values for αtiss (in sec/m) are
in Table 4.2; the value for diamond was estimated from the acoustic
line discussion in Section 7.2.5.3. Assuming <10 KHz bronchial
turbulence noise of initial amplitude A0 = 4 x 10-5 atm, Ax ~ 3.7 x 10-5
atm through 1 meter of typical soft tissue; Ax ~ 3.4 x 10-5 atm even
if 0.1 meter of bone is interposed in the acoustic path. Either Ax is
reliably detected from anywhere in the body using a >(210 nm)3
pressure sensor (Eqn 4.29).
4.9.1.4 Mechanical Body Noises
Many other mechanical body noises should be globally audible
to properly instrumented medical nanodevices. If normal chewing
motions (of hard foods) release 1-10 milliwatts in a ~100 cm3
 oral
volume with a ~1 sec jawstroke, power density is ~10 watts/m3 or
~10-4 atm of tooth-crunching noise. A stomach growl registering
45 dB (vs. 30 dB whisper, 60 dB normal conversation) at 2 meters
has a source power of 160 milliwatts; released from a 10 cm3 gastric
sphincter volume gives a ~2 x 10-6 atm acoustic wave, detectable
throughout the body. Walking and running releases 20-100 joules/
footfall for a 70 kg man; assuming the energy is absorbed within a
~1 cm thickness or within ~1 second by the sole of the foot, Eqn.
4.53 implies an upward-moving planar compression wave of 0.4-2.0
atm, easily detectable by acoustically instrumented nanodevices
body-wide. (Shoe insoles dissipate energy and alter the shock wave
pulse shape.)3493,3494 Hand-clapping generates 0.02-0.2 atm pulses, also
easily detectable.
Lesser noises including ~30 millisec hiccups at (4-60)/min,2122
intestinal and ureteral peristalsis, sloshing of liquid stomach contents,
heart murmurs, a tap on the shoulder by a friend, nasal sniffling
and swallowing, clicks from picking or drumming fingernails,
crepitations, manustuprations and ejaculations, the rustling noise
of clothing against the skin, flapping eyelids, anal towelling, bruits
(including murmurs and thrills) due to vascular lesions, dermal
impact of water while showering, copulatory noises, urethral flow
turbulence during urination, transmitted vibrations from musical
instruments, creaking joints, and squeaking muscles can be detected
locally if not globally. Implantation of significant interconnected in
vivo diamondoid structures may produce increased sensitivity to
internal noises, due to the extremely low acoustic absorption
coefficient of diamond (Table 4.2).
4.9.1.5 Vocalizations
Average source power for conversational speech in air is ~10
microwatts at the vocal cords (60 dB), up to ~1000 microwatts
for shouting (90 dB) and as little as 0.1 microwatts (30 dB) for
whispering.3511 Vocal cord surface area ~1 cm2
, giving an acoustic
intensity I ~ 0.001-10 watts/m2
. (Using the decibel notation, dB =
10 log10 (I/I0), where I0 ~ 5 x 10-13 watts/m2 in air, I0 ~ 1 x 10-16
watts/m2 in water.) In a planar traveling wave, pressure amplitude
Ap (N/m2
) is related to power intensity I by

A 2 v I p sound
1/2 = ( ) ρ (/ ) N m2 {Eqn. 4.53}
For water at 310 K, ρ = 993.4 kg/m3 and vsound = 1500 m/sec,
therefore Ap = 0.0005-0.05 atm for speech, detectable by nanodevices
throughout the body due to minimal attenuation at audible
frequencies (Section 4.9.1.3). Other easily detectable vocalizations
include whistling, humming, coughing, sneezing, rales, wheezing,
Table 4.2 Amplitude Absorption Coefficients for Acoustic
Waves in Human Body Tissue628,629,730
Coefficient Coefficient
Body Tissue α (sec/m) Body Tissue α (sec/m)
For αliq (sec2
/m): Fat 7.0 x 10-6
Water 2.5 x 10-14 Soft tissue (avg) 8.3 x 10-6
Castor oil 1.2 x 10-11 Liver 1.0 x 10-5
Air (STP) 1.4 x 10-10 Nerves 1.0 x 10-5
For αtiss (sec/m): Brain (adult) 1.1 x 10-5
Diamond (est.) ~2 x 10-15 Kidney 1.2 x 10-5
Aqueous humor 1.1 x 10-6 Muscle 2.3 x 10-5
Vitreous humor 1.2 x 10-6 Eye lens 2.6 x 10-5
Blood 2.1 x 10-6 Polythene (plastic) 5.8 x 10-5
Brain (infant) 3.4 x 10-6 Bone 1.6 x 10-4
Abdomen 5.9 x 10-6 Lung 4.7 x 10-4
*Most medical ultrasound textbooks assume a ~ν dependency of attenuation in soft tissues; apparently, the actual dependency730 is ~ν1.1.
118 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Table 4.3 Acoustic Impedance for Specular Reflection
by Acoustic Waves Crossing a Material
Interface536,628,629,730,763
Impedance Impedance
Body Tissue (kg/m2
-sec) Body Tissue (kg/m2
-sec)
Air 400 Liver (25˚C) 1.65 x 106
Lung 1.80 x 105 Blood 1.65 x 106
Fat 1.39 x 106 Nerve (optic) 1.68 x 106
Aqueous humor 1.51 x 106 Muscle 1.73 x 106
Water 1.52 x 106 Lens of eye 1.84 x 106
Brain (25˚C) 1.57 x 106 Nylon 2.9 x 106
Skin 1.6 x 106 Skull bone 7.80 x 106
Soft tissue (avg.) 1.63 x 106 Enamel 1.71 x 107
Kidney 1.63 x 106 Diamond 6.3 x 107
expectorating, eructations, flatus, vomiting, hawking and
noseblowing.
In the case of spherical waves diverging from an omnidirectional
transmitter of radius r at a distance X from the transmitter, average
intensity declines inversely as the square of the distance and so I in
Eqn. 4.53 must be replaced by (I r2
 / X2
).
4.9.1.6 Environmental Sources
Can in vivo nanodevices directly detect sounds emanating from
the environment outside of the body, such as other people talking
in the same room or a door slamming? The waves from an external
acoustic source of power PR watts travel through the air and, upon
arriving at the air/skin interface a distance xR from the source with
amplitude Aincident, are transmitted through the interface with
amplitude Atransmit. For a specular reflector—interface dimensions
(human body ~ 2 m) > acoustic wavelength (~0.03-3.0 m for typical
audible sounds in air)—with acoustic impedance Z1 and Z2 on
either side of the interface and perpendicular incidence,506,628

A A1 abs Z Z
Z Z transmit incident 1 2
1 2
= − −
+














{Eqn. 4.54}
Acoustic impedance, like the speed of sound, is essentially
frequency-independent over the nanomedically-relevant range of
ultrasonic frequencies. For Zair = 400 kg/m2
-sec and assuming Zskin
~ 1.6 x 106 kg/m2
-sec from Table 4.3, then Atransmit = (5 x 10-4)
Aincident. In other words, there is ~99.95% reflection from the airskin interface, which is why coupling mediums like gels and oils are
commonly employed in ultrasound imaging. If an immediately
subdermal nanodevice can detect a minimum Atransmit ~ 10-6 atm,
then from Eqn. 4.53 and simple geometry:

P 2 x A
 v R R
2
incident
2
sound
= π
ρ
{Eqn. 4.55}
For STP (1 atm, 0˚C) air, ρ = 1.29 kg/m3 and vsound = 331 m/sec. If
the minimum detectable pressure ~10-6 atm (Section 4.5.1)
~ Atransmit, then at a distance of xR = 2 meters the acoustic source
must have a power of ~2000 watts, far exceeding the ~1 milliwatt
output of a person loudly shouting. To hear normal conversation at
xR = 2 m, minimum nanodevice detector sensitivity falls to 7 x 10-11
atm requiring a subdermal pressure nanosensor ~(17 micron)3 in
size (Eqn. 4.29), roughly the dimensions of a single human cell;
other methods may prove more efficient (Sections 4.9.5 and 7.4.6.3).
Of course, an ex vivo acoustic nanosensor may receive sound
that has passed through no interface, hence may detect pressure
waves ~3 orders of magnitude lower in amplitude. Assuming Atransmit
= Aincident, PR ~ 600 microwatts, so ex vivo nanorobots with a 0.3
micron3 sensor could hear people shouting at xR = 2 meters. To hear
talking (~10 microwatt source) requires a 2.4 micron3 ex vivo pressure
sensor (limit ~10-7 atm), from Eqn. 4.29.
Optimally positioned and calibrated nanomedical pressure sensors
could directly measure changes in the ambient barometric pressure
to within ± 10-6 atm. Normal atmospheric variation due to weather
ranges from 0.94-1.05 atm; such slow moving changes are readily
monitored. Very near the Earth’s surface, the air pressure P at altitude h
above sea level is approximated by P = e-kph (atm), where kp =
1.16 x 10-4 m-1 at 20˚C; at sea level, a 10-6 atm change in pressure
reflects a change in altitude of only ~1 cm. However, the opening or
closing of a door inside a (~5 m)3 room that displaces >125 cm3 of
air also causes a minimally detectable >10-6 atm pressure pulse. Other
sources of environmental pressure variation such as infrasonic (~0.2
Hz) microbaroms from offshore ocean storms,1526 wind entering
through open windows, forced-air currents from central heating or
A/C systems, or even the movements of nearby people and pets
may be detectable and thus may further confuse the measurement,
reducing absolute accuracy unless suitable corrections are made.
4.9.2 Proprioceptive Macrosensing
4.9.2.1 Kinesthetic Macrosensing
Using a navigational transponder network (Section 8.3.3), a
population of ~1011 nanodevices each spaced an average ~100 microns
apart throughout the body tissues can determine relative location
to a positional accuracy of ~3 microns and an angular accuracy of
~2 milliradian, with the data updatable once every millisecond. Thus
dispersed, the network can continuously monitor and record the
relative positions of all limbs with worst-case (cumulative error) ~0.8
mm accuracy over a 2-meter span (Section 8.3.3). These devices
can prepare high-resolution dynamic maps of body position, velocity,
acceleration and rotation, allowing precise real-time digital kinesthesia
during sports or artistic activities such as gymnastics, pole vaulting,
or ballet; during transportative activities such as driving cars around
hairpin turns, roller-coaster rides, military aircraft maneuvers and
space launches; during precision tool-using such as needle-threading,
antique watch repair, or while using the fingers as measurement
calipers; during self-defense activities requiring complex motions
such as karate or judo; and during emergency situations such as
automobile crashes and tumbling motions during falls from great
heights. All such sensory data is readily outmessaged to the patient
or user in real time (Section 7.4).
Nanorobots could assist in path integration or the reconstruction of
experienced limb trajectories.1040 Given the ability to determine
rotation rates and to measure applied forces and torques, the network
should also be able to forecast the anticipated future positions of
limbs. By comparing these projections to actual results, the network
can then infer the viscosity of the medium in which the activity is
taking place (e.g., air or water), whether the environment is stable
or is translating or rotating in some direction, and whether the human
user is physically supported or in free-fall. Internal nanodevices can
directly measure if a body is sitting, standing, laying prone, inverted,
falling, floating or diving, and then communicate that information
directly to the human user (Section 7.4). Detection of patient
activity states—e.g., the patient is sitting, standing, or walking—
can be used to control nanorobot behaviors (Chapter 12), activate
or deactivate outmessaging displays (Section 7.4.6), and so forth. A
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 119
simple macroscale wearable tactile “compass belt” that would convey
desired geographical directions has already been proposed.2994
4.9.2.2 Orientational Macrosensing
Since nanopendular sensors can reliably determine the direction
of the local gravity field vector to within ~2 milliradians in ~10-4
sec (Section 4.3.4.2), the navigational network can poll its members
and arrive at an accurate consensus on which direction is up.
Nanodevices affixed to relatively stable hard body parts will exhibit
more consistent orientational readings. Measurement of the gravity
vector allows the vertical orientation of the rest of the body to be
precisely fixed in space, especially useful for gymnasts, trapeze artists,
underwater divers in murky lakes, and vestibular-impaired individuals,
to whom this information may be outmessaged directly (Section 7.4).
The gravitational vector may also be indirectly measured, albeit
more slowly and less accurately, by monitoring the body’s natural
reactions to changes in the axis of gravitational loading. For
instance, the variation in head-to-toe hydrostatic pressure for a 1.7
m tall, 70 kg human standing in a 1-g gravity field is ~0.17 atm; the
ability to measure a systematic cross-body differential of 10-6 atm
allows the detection of a ~10-5 g change along the lengthwise aspect, or
~10-4 g change along the transverse aspect. Thus a continuously
updated whole-body barostatic map allows the human body to serve
as a three-dimensional gravity/orientation sensor.
4.9.2.3 Body Weight Measurement
A network of nanodevices can inventory the volume and density
of each of the body’s ~108 (1 mm)3 voxels using a combination of
acoustic ranging, somatic mapping, and flowmetry. Each voxel is
identified as fat, muscle tissue, bone mass, interstitial fluid, and so
forth. These measurements allow the body’s weight to be precisely
computed as volume times density, rather than the usual method of
determining weight using gravitational force data. The existence of
a natural physiological “ponderostat,” a crudely analogous humoral
body-mass detector, has been proposed507; indeed, the insulin-leptin
system3265 has been found to serve a related purpose, and is easily
eavesdropped by medical nanorobots.
4.9.2.4 Gravitational Geographic Macrosensing
Medical nanodevices can measure variations in the gravity field
to ~10-6 g’s for L = 20 micron gravimeters in a measurement time
tmeas = 2-9 millisec (Section 4.4.2). This implies that in vivo
nanodevices can take precise measurements of their latitude and
altitude relative to sea level ~100 times every second. Gravity
increases toward the poles and at lower altitudes. Specifically, using
the formula of Cassinis (accounting for rotational and polar flattening
effects on the Earth) with the Bouguer correction to the free air
variation by altitude (assuming flat topography), measured gravity
gmeas is given approximately by

g g1 k meas 0 1 sin k sin 2 k h k h 2
L 2
2 = + [ ] ( ) θθ ρ − ( ) L 3 4 − + earth
{Eqn. 4.56}
where θL = terrestrial latitude (equator = 0˚), h = height above sea
level in meters, g0 = 9.78039 m/sec2 (equatorial sea-level value of g),
k1 = 5.2884 x 10-3, k2 = 5.9 x 10-6, k3 = 3.086 x 10-6 sec-2, k4 =
4.185 x 10-7, and ρearth = 5522 kg/m3
.
Since sea-level g varies from 9.78039 m/sec2 at the equator to
9.83217 m/sec2 at the north pole, a 20-micron gravimeter (∆g =
10-6 g) detects a change in position of 1 arcmin of latitude or ~1900
meters north/south along the Earth’s surface. Similarly, since at 45˚
latitude g varies from 9.806 m/sec2 at sea level to 9.803 m/sec2 at
1000 meters altitude, a 20-micron gravimeter detects a change in
altitude of ~3.3 meters (e.g., upstairs vs. downstairs in a house). For
comparison, in 1998 high-quality commercial gravity gradiometers
measured gradients of ~10-9 g/meter and allowed the compilation
of micro-g (~1 milligal) resolution aerial gravity maps;1527 atom
interferometers measured the gravitational acceleration of atoms to
a precision of 10-10.
To achieve such phenomenal positional accuracies, the nanodevice
must be able to computationally resolve several complicating factors.
First, localized mass concentrations representing nonuniformities
in crustal density produce residuals of up to ±0.0006 m/sec2
, which
may be removed from the data using a standard map of known
terrestrial isostatic variations and anomalies. Indeed, matching
observations to such a map could provide useful longitudinal
information as well. Another complication is the variation in gravity
due to tidal forces amounting to ~3 x 10-7 g’s, twice daily, which lies
at the limits of detectability for a 20-micron gravimeter. Other minor
geodesic and terrain-related corrections, too complicated for
discussion here, may also need to be applied in certain circumstances.
Note that the presence of nearby heavy objects does not influence
measurement accuracy: a 100-ton building 10 meters away adds a
lateral acceleration of only 7 x 10-9 g’s to a human body.
One final complication is that patient movements create kinematic
accelerations that must be distinguished from the gravitational
accelerations. Gravity readings can be corrected by taking derivatives of
the signals from kinesthetic monitoring to give gravity in the reference
frame of the patient’s room, and many individual measurements
may be averaged to improve accuracy since the gravity vector normally
changes only very slowly.
4.9.3 Electric/Magnetic Macrosensing
4.9.3.1 Vascular-Interstitial Closed Electric Circuits
In vivo studies of the electric properties of blood vessels shows
that the walls of veins and arteries present a specific electric resistance
~200 times greater than the conductive medium of blood (plasma)—
roughly 200 ohm-m vs. 0.7 ohm-m. Thus blood vessels are properly
regarded as relatively insulated conducting cables which can electrically
connect an injured tissue with surrounding noninjured tissue.
Capillaries form an electric junction with the interstitial fluid, so the
electric gradient can be canceled by ionic transport. Cell membranes
are insulating dielectrics with resistance and capacitance, penetrated
by ionic channels or gates for ionic transport. Additionally, in 1941
Szent-Gyorgyi suggested the possibility of semi-conduction in proteins,
a theory which has since been elaborated by many investigators.690
B. Nordenstrom689,690,3489 has proposed that the above schema
represents a system for selective electrogenous mass transport of
material between blood and tissue which he calls Vascular-Interstitial
Closed (electric) Circuits (VICCs)—in effect, an additional electrocirculatory system operating in parallel with the well-known diffusive,
osmotic, and hydrodynamic mechanisms of regular bloodstream
materials transport. As long as ions can leak through open pores
and migrate through ion channels, long distance transport cannot
take place and the VICC system remains primarily a local (e.g.,
within tissues), not global, electrical circuit. Connections also exist
with conductive media including cerebrospinal fluid, bile, and
urine.3490
Nanorobots capable of monitoring the status of local VICCs
may rapidly and efficiently acquire a wealth of systemic information
without the need for direct inspection of the affected tissues. For
example, when a working muscle produces catabolic products such
as lactic acid, an electrochemical potential gradient develops
120 Nanomedicine • Volume I
between the muscle and surrounding tissue in a known manner.3491
Injured tissues become polarized in relation to surrounding tissue,
as initial catabolic degradation products acidify the tissue. Malignant
neoplasms, benign neoplasms, and internally necrotic granulomas
all may polarize electrically in relation to surrounding tissue; a
vascular thrombus also contains ionized material. Large deflections
in the diffusion potential of blood occur if blood is deoxygenated or
is infected with Gram-negative bacteria. Blood changes its electric
potential from +500 mV to +1000 mV during spontaneous
coagulation, and the spontaneous electric potential at the site of a
crush injury of the iliac crest in rats oscillated several times between
+190 mV and -60 mV over a four day experimental trial.690
Nordenstrom proposes that in vivo electrophoresis via the VICC
system may also play a role in mediating leukotaxis. When tissue is
artificially polarized by electrodes, accumulation of granulocytes with
margination and development of pseudopods is the result. In one
experiment, exposure of a mesenterial membrane to a 1 microampere 1
volt field for 30 minutes stimulated diapedetic bleeding near the
anode. At higher power, the arterio-capillaries contracted, narrowed,
and emptied of blood cells, while the veno-capillaries and venules
widened and filled with granulocytes. Monitoring such actions of
local VICCs experiencing natural voltage fluctuations could alert
medical nanorobots to the presence of local injuries, tissue changes,
or pathologies that otherwise might go unnoticed for a considerable
time.
4.9.3.2 Electric/Magnetic Geographic Macrosensing
Detection of electric fields to ~100 volts/m (Section 4.7.1), the
normal vertical atmospheric gradient, in theory might allow
determination of aboveground altitude to ~1 m accuracy if the time
between recalibrations is very brief. However, a human body (which
is a good conductor), standing on level ground, acquires a slight
negative surface charge and becomes “part of the ground” electrically.
This distorts upward the equipotentials that usually run parallel to
the ground, thoroughly corrupting an altitude measurement. Nearby
lightning hits and storms are detectable, which is useful.
However, medical nanodevices with appropriate magnetometers
can measure variations in magnetic field to ~0.1 microtesla using a
(660 nm)3 permanent magnet sensor, in a measurement time tmeas
~ 0.6 millisec (Section 4.7.2). Geomagnetic field maps of the Earth’s
surface are highly nonisotropic in both latitudinal and longitudinal
directions; knowledge of the field plus the absolute direction of true
north (e.g., using a nanogyroscope; Section 4.3.4.1) gives longitude
information from the separation of the planetary magnetic and spin
poles. This implies that properly equipped in vivo nanodevices can
establish their latitude and longitude on Earth’s surface ~1000 times
every second by this means. In particular, the horizontal component of
the geomagnetic field vector ranges from 0-41 microtesla from
magnetic pole to magnetic equator; the independent vertical field
component ranges from 0-70 microtesla. Thus a 0.1-microtesla sensor
should resolve each component to an accuracy of ~11 arcmin or
~20 km in both latitude or longitude. Terrestrial surface magnetic
anomalies (e.g., iron deposits) produce local variations of 0.03-30
microtesla and are thus detectable. Additional complications to these
measurements include artificial magnetic field sources, the 0.01-0.1
microtesla solar daily variation, occasional magnetic storms producing
erratic geomagnetic fluctuations of 0.01-5 microtesla, suddencommencement ionospheric electrojets up to 0.3 microtesla, and
various long-term secular variations in the geomagnetic field.
Radio, television, and direct broadcast satellite signals probably
are not detectable by individual nanodevices (Section 7.2.3), but
such detection may be indirectly achieved in vivo using nanorobotaccessible dedicated macroscale antennas implanted in the body
(Section 7.3.4).
4.9.3.3 Piezoelectric Stress Macrosensing
The piezoelectric effect (Sections 6.3.2 and 6.3.5) is “the
production of electrical polarization in a material by the application of
mechanical stress”.3089 Many materials in the human body are
piezoelectric, including tendon and elastin, dentin and
bone.1939-1942,3089-3095 This polarization, or surface charge, varies as
the physical stress imposed on the material changes over time. Thus,
measurement of the piezoelectric effect in bone or tendon can provide
information on the physical loads that are being carried by these
materials. For example, a shear stress applied along the long axis of
a bone alters the polarization voltage that appears on a surface at
right angles to the axis.3089 In another experiment,3093 piezoelectric
surface charges on a loaded human femur were measured to range
from -131 to +207 picocoulombs/cm2 (-8 to +13 charges/micron2
)
from one end of the bone to the other end, depending upon position
along the shaft. Real-time monitoring of this data would permit
specific inferences as to the amount of load the bone was carrying
and from what direction, including bending, shearing, and twisting
forces, from which whole-body activity states could subsequently
be inferred. Knowledge of these surface charge variations might also
be exploited in osteographic (Section 8.2.4) or functional (Section
8.4) navigation.
4.9.4 Optical Macrosensing
In vivo medical nanodevices can gather little useful optical
information from the external environment. Here’s why.
In biological soft tissues, scattering dominates absorption except
in the pigmented layers of the epidermis and stratum corneum. Thus
the propagation of light in tissues may be regarded as occurring in
two steps.509,510
In the first step, optical photons of intensity I0 falling perpendicularly
on skin are transmitted according to Beer’s law through tissue to a
depth z with a transmitted intensity of

I I z 0 sp l r e watts/m2 = ( ) − ( ) −σtz {Eqn. 4.57}
where rsp = specular reflection coefficient for visible light (Fresnel
reflection at the air-tissue surface) ~ 4%-7%,508 or 0% if the original
light source lies within the body; and the transmission coefficient
σt = σa (absorption coefficient ~ 300 m-1) + σs (scattering coefficient
~ 30,000 m-1) for various human soft tissues at optical wavelengths.510 (Coefficient values for the most heavily pigmented skin
layers may be 5-7 times higher.)508 Typical values for σt
~ 10,000-100,000 m-1, average ~30,000 m-1 for soft tissue, although
exceptionally clear tissues with σt = 1000 m-1 have been
reported.510,729 Thus the mean free path of an optical photon in
human soft tissue is 10-100 microns, average ~ 30 microns (~1.5
tissue cell-widths), up to an extreme maximum of ~1 mm for the
most transparent tissues known. For σt ~ 30,000 m-1, at z = 150
microns, Iz / I0 ~ 0.01 and ~99% of all photons have been scattered
at least once from their initial path.
In the second step, in an unbounded medium the patch of fully
scattered photons continues to propagate through the tissue via
diffusion until all photons are absorbed. The complicated governing
diffusion equation has not yet been been completely solved
analytically,510 but the asymptotic diffusive fluence is given roughly by

I ~ d i I e watts/m − d z 2 ( ) σ {Eqn. 4.58}
Basic Capabilities • Nanosensors and Nanoscale Scanning 121
where σd is the diffusion exponent or effective attenuation coefficient
(averaging ~900 m-1 for typical soft tissues but with an extremely
wide range reported over the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared
wavelengths, from 10-1,000,000 m-1.)729 As a crude approximation,
the initial intensity of the fully scattered photon patch Ii ~ I0
(1 - rsp) ascat, where ascat = σs / (σs + σa) ~ 0.987 is the albedo for
single particle scattering.
Over the optical band from 400-700 nm, incident intensity I0 =
100-400 watts/m2 when standing in direct sunlight; artificial lighting
in homes and offices is typically 0.1-10 watts/m2
; moonlight provides
only I0 ~ 10-4 watts/m2
; and the absolute threshold for human vision is
~10-8 watts/m2
.
585 For σd ~ 900 m-1, the intensity ratio of transmitted/
incident visible light falls to Id / I0 = 0.1 at z = 2.5 mm depth (~eyelids),
~10-4 at z = 1 cm depth, and ~10-11 at z = 2.8 cm—a depth at which
the tissue would be completely dark to the human eye even under
direct sunlight illumination at the outermost skin surface.
An optical nanosensor with Nsensor receiver elements, with each
receiver element having an area Ae = 1 nm2 and capable of singlephoton detection, requires an integration time for reliable detection of
eSNR photons given by

t ~
h e
I N A meas
SNR
d sensor e
ν (sec) {Eqn. 4.59}
where h = 6.63 x 10-34 joule-sec and ν = 4.3-7.5 x 1014 Hz for
optical photons. Let us assume that a patient is standing in I0 ~ 400
watt/m2 direct unfiltered sunlight, and that tmeas = 1 sec, SNR = 2,
Nsensor = 25,000 elements giving a nanorobot eyespot of Ae Nsensor =
0.025 micron2
, and that σd = 900 m-1. Then from Eqns. 4.58 and
4.59 the maximum tissue depth for optical photon detection is zmax
~ 17 mm (Id ~ 10-4 watt/m2
) which includes a volume of tissue
comprising up to ~30% of total body volume. Changes in illumination
at the minimum indoor artificial level of ~0.1 watts/m2 are visible
to zmax ~ 7 mm depth. This eyespot, if exposed to air on the outermost surface of the skin, is just sensitive enough to detect full
moonlight.
Our general conclusion is that variations in normal indoor lighting
may be directly measurable by nanorobots stationed within the
outermost ~1 cm of body tissues. Imaging, as opposed to the simple
illumination detection system described here, is a much more difficult
design challenge (Chapter 30). Direct stimulation of retina-resident
nanosensors is described in Section 7.4.6.5 (D).
4.9.5 Neural Macrosensing
The ability to detect individual neural cell electrical discharges
noninvasively in many different ways (Section 4.8.6), coupled with
the abilities (A) to recognize and identify specific desired target nerve
cells (Section 8.5.2, Chapter 25) and (B) to pool data gathered
independently by spatially separated nanodevices in real time (Section
7.3), offers the possibility of indirect neural macrosensing of complex
environmental stimuli by eavesdropping on the body’s own regular
sensory signal traffic.
For example, facultatively mobile nanodevices may swim into
the spiral artery of the ear and down through its bifurcations to
reach the cochlear canal, then position themselves as neural monitors
in the vicinity of the spiral nerve fibers and the nerves entering the
epithelium of the organ of Corti (cochlear or auditory nerves) within
the spiral ganglion (Figure 7.4). These monitors can detect, record,
or rebroadcast to other nanodevices in the communications network
all auditory neural traffic perceived by the human ear. Advanced
speech recognition systems (Section 7.4.2.3) may permit recovery
of spoken words and identification of individual speakers (including
vocalizations by the user), recognition of background noises, reception
and validation of cues or commands spoken directly to in vivo
nanosystems by authorized medical personnel, and so forth. Since
properly configured monitors can also modulate or stimulate nerve
impulses (Sections 4.8.6 and 7.4.5.6), these devices may add audible
signals to the audio traffic, thus may be employed as hearing aids
(using feedback loops), real-time language translation mechanisms,
continuous vocalization/audition recorders, voice-stress analyzers,
or nanodevice-user communications links (Section 7.4).
Nanomonitors positioned at the afferent nerve endings emanating
from hair cells located in the otolithic membrane of the utricle and
saccule and in the cristae ampullaris of the semicircular canals allow
medical nanodevices to directly record, amplify, attenuate, or modulate
the body’s own sensations of gravity, rotation, and acceleration,
although kinesthetic sensory management might also be required
for complete control. Motor neurons likewise can be monitored to
keep track of limb motions and positions, or specific muscle activities,
and even to exert control (Section 7.4.6.2). Neuron-resident
nanorobots may detect auditory effects induced in the brain by pulsed
microwaves from external sources.3473 Feline cochlear neurons
sensitive to audible frequencies of >300 Hz respond to single
microwave pulses at a threshold-specific absorption rate of 6-11
watts/kg-pulse,3479,3480 while in humans the threshold for effect,
which depends on energy per pulse, may be as low as ~0.02 joule/
m2
-pulse for people with low hearing threshold.3481
Olfactory and gustatory sensory neural traffic similarly may be
eavesdropped by nanosensory instruments (Section 7.4). Nerve taps
in the medulla oblongata or at the phrenic nerve that drives the
diaphragmatic muscles allow direct monitoring of respiratory activity.
Pain signals may be recorded or modified as required, as can
mechanical and temperature nerve impulses from other receptors
located in the skin. Even psychological variables such as emotionality,
vigilance, and mental workload may be directly monitored by
measuring ANS activity in sympathetic efferent fibers outside of
the brain.512
The most complex and difficult challenge in neural macrosensing
will be optic nerve taps. The retina is thoroughly vascularized,
permitting ready access to both photoreceptor (rod, cone, bipolar
and ganglion) and integrator (horizontal, amacrine, and centrifugal
bipolar) neurons. However, the optic nerve bundle itself has ~106
tightly bunched individual nerve fibers, a 10-100 MHz signal bandwidth, and significant natural data compression techniques which
all must be untangled in real time. Developing algorithms capable
of interpreting raw optical nerve traffic,3018-3021 say, to recognize a
specific human face or a specific scene in the vision field, would
prove a significant research challenge. (Direct monitoring of photoreceptors or retinal membrane potentials and other techniques
(Section 7.4.6.5) may simplify untangling of the signal compression.)
Rapid visual field identification using artificial neural nets is also a
subject of much current research interest. Eyeball rotations (e.g.,
via resident intradevice nanogyroscopes; Section 4.3.4.1), eyelid
position, pupil aperture, and lens accommodation under ciliary
muscle control must be monitored to supplement the vision field
analysis.
4.9.6 Other Macrosensing
We have only scratched the surface of the potential for nanorobot
macrosensing. Medical nanodevices can quantitatively monitor
variables not normally accessible to human consciousness, such as:
1. hormone and neurotransmitter levels;
2. gastroelectric oscillations and skin conductivity;
122 Nanomedicine • Volume I
3. pupil dilations;
4. drug and alcohol (and breakdown product) concentrations in
the blood;
5. internal organ damage or malfunction;
6. digital real-time performance data on vital organs or limbs (e.g.,
continuous kidney volume throughput, pancreatic insulin
output, cholesterol metabolism in the liver, or lactic acid
production in specific muscles during exercise); and
7. continuous mapping of thermoregulatory isotherms from which
the temperature and heat capacity of the external medium (e.g.,
swimming pool water, cool night air) and the presence of
sunlight or shade on the skin (via dermal thermal differentials)
may be inferred (Section 8.4.1.3).
Various chemical substances cyclically increase and decrease in
serum concentration with time of day, permitting crude temporal
macrosensing (Section 10.1.1). Other substances (e.g., aldosterone;
Appendix B) significantly vary in serum concentration depending
upon whether the patient is supine or standing, thus permitting
limited biochemical postural macrosensing.
If nanorobots can leave and re-enter the body (Section 8.6; Chapter
16), then macrosensing may include direct sampling of the external
environment upon demand and the possibilities for remote data
acquisition become virtually limitless.
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 5
Shapes and Metamorphic Surfaces
5.1 Flexible Form and Function
I
t has been asserted that nanomechanical systems fundamentally
differ from systems of biological molecular machinery in their
basic architecture—specifically, that nanomechanical components
are supported and constrained by stiff housings, while biological
components often can move freely with respect to one another.10 As
regards medical nanodevices, this may be a somewhat artificial
distinction. The likelihood that most nanoscale components will be
connected in rigid arrays does not imply that the nanomachines
themselves must be entirely rigid in shape, nor does it rule out the
possibility that some major nanomachine components may be
designed to allow periodic reconfiguration and repositioning.
Why might a flexible shape be useful in nanomedicine? While
cell membranes are self-sealing, large wall breaches during cell repair
operations can be problematical. A flexible shape makes it easier for
a cell repair nanodevice to enter the cytoplasm with minimum
disruption, for instance by elongating and narrowing so as to present
the narrowest possible aspect during plasma membrane and
cytoskeletal penetration (Section 9.4.5). When navigating through
narrow passages in hard biological substances such as bone or enamel,
a nanorobot with a rigid shape is more likely to scrape or jam than
is a more flexibly-shaped device. Extensible volumes allow the
projection of compliant mechanical pseudopods of various sizes and
shapes from the nanomachine surface. Deformable bumpers make
it easier to establish and maintain reliable multidevice linkages in
large-scale cooperative nanorobotic architectures.
Flexibility expands the options available for nanodevice mobility to
include amoeboid and pulsatile peristaltic locomotion (Section
9.4.3), surface deformation natation (Section 9.4.2.5.1), and
circumvascular tissue diving or nanorobot diapedesis (Section 9.4.4).
Fluidlike surfaces are ubiquitous among motile microorganisms.
Malleable nanodevices situated on a cardiac or arterial luminal surface
can adopt minimum fluid drag configurations.
Microhydrodynamic stability is another factor. For example,
when placed in a bloodflow of constant speed in a tubular vessel, a
rigid sphere, rod, or disk will tumble as it travels, due to the differential
axial velocity field. But external fluid stresses distort a deformable
object like an emulsion droplet from its original spherical shape
into an ellipsoid oriented at a constant angle to the direction of
flow. The fluid stresses are transmitted across the droplet interface;
the surface and interior fluid circulates about the particle center in
a tank tread motion.386 Shape changes can also be employed for
steering and orientational control during active nanorobot swimming
(Section 9.4.2.5): Hard-shelled particles without active mobility
don’t marginate laterally in blood vessels; deformable surfaces can
radially migrate.362 Flexible surfaces may also be used to minimize
the increment to blood viscosity caused by the presence of
bloodborne nanorobots (Section 9.4.1.4).
A flexible or “metamorphic” surface is a nanodevice exterior
surface comprised of independently controllable elements that can
translate or rotate their relative positions, thus enlarging or
contracting total surface area of the device, or changing its shape,
with or without altering the membership of elements in the surface,
with or without altering the enclosed volume of the entire
nanomachine, while maintaining continuous structural integrity and
nonpermeability of the surface. The range of possible designs is
enormous. Metamorphic surfaces may include integument systems
with semirigid components; hinged elements with fixed relative
position and area, allowing variable volume; partially mobile surfaces
having unit elements of fixed size but variable position relative to
their neighbors, allowing control of surface area as well as volume;
and even fully metamorphic surfaces with surface elements free to
rotate, alter shape or orientation, slide, or even change membership,
permitting maximum surface/volume flexibility.
Device shape is driven by task requirements which may or may
not demand surface flexibility, as described in Section 5.2. Section
5.3 presents a number of design alternatives for metamorphic
surfaces and manipulators, and briefly considers the impact of surface
flexibility on internal configurational design. Section 5.4 examines
the challenges of metamorphic bumpers which serve as interdevice
fasteners and junctions. Discussion of the biocompatibility of
nanodevice surfaces3234 is deferred to Chapter 15.
5.2 Optimum Nanorobot Shape
The optimum nanorobot shape varies according to the function the
device is designed to perform and the environment in which the device
must operate.3582 A consideration of the many different functions that
medical nanodevices are asked to perform suggests several general classes
of tasks requiring specific group geometries which drive the choice
of optimum individual nanodevice geometry for each task class.
For comparison, microscopic unicellular bacteria generally take three
basic forms: spherical or ellipsoidal (the cocci), cylindrical or rodshaped (the bacilli), and curved rod, spiral, or comma-shaped (the
spirilla), though there is at least one example of a square
bacterium.2028
5.2.1 Free-Floating Solitary Nanodevices
Free-floating simple nanorobots intended solely as materials
delivery or storage devices, or used as omnidirectional communications, navigational or control transponders operating independently
in vivo, have no preferred orientation. Thus these nanorobots may
be spherically symmetric with rigid surfaces. Spherical particles
produce the smallest possible increment in blood viscosity as they
tumble, in part because spheres offer the smallest possible interaction
surface per unit volume of any geometrical shape. Such simple
124 Nanomedicine • Volume I
nanomachines are the kind most likely to be deployed in the greatest
numbers, and their reduced surface area minimizes potential
biocompatibility problems.
These free-floating nanodevices must have ready access to all
tissues via blood vessels. Since they are nonmotile machines, to avoid
getting stuck they must not physically extend wider across their
longest axis than the width of human capillaries, which average 8
microns in diameter but may be as narrow as 4 microns (Section
8.2.1.2).
Consider a nanodevice of fixed surface area An, total volume Vn,
and longest transdevice diameter Ln. Then:
A. For a spherical device of radius r, then Ln = 2 r, An = 4 π r2, and
Vn = (4/3) π r3.
B. For a prolate spheroidal (football-shaped) device of length 2a,
width 2b, and eccentricity e = (a2 - b2)1/2 / a, then An = 2 π b2 +
2 π a b (arcsin(e) / e) and Vn = (4/3) π a b2. For an oblate
spheroidal device, An = 2 π a2 + π b2 (ln({1+e}/{1-e}) / e) and Vn
= (4/3) π a2 b. In both cases, Ln = 2a and the maximum
enclosed volume per unit area occurs at a = b (e.g., a sphere).
C. For a right circular disk or cylindrical device of radius r and
height h, then Ln = (h2 + 4r2)1/2, An = 2 π r (h + r), and Vn = π
r2 h. Maximum enclosed volume per unit area occurs at h = 21/2 r.
D. For a right circular conical device of radius r and height h, then
Ln = 2r for h  31/2 r (but Ln = (h2 + r2)1/2 if h > 31/2 r), An = π
( r2 + r (h2 + r2)1/2), and Vn = π r2 h / 3. Maximum enclosed
volume per unit area occurs at h = 31/2 r.
E. For a right triangular prismatic device (Fig. 5.4) with three equal
sides of length s and height h, then Ln = (h2 + s2)1/2, An = 3 h s
+ 31/2 s2/ 2, and Vn = 31/2 s2 h / 4. Maximum enclosed volume
per unit area occurs at h = s / 21/2.
F. For a cubical device with three equal sides of length s, then Ln =
(31/2) s, An = 6 s2, and Vn = s3.
G. For a right square prismatic device with two equal sides of length
s and height h, then Ln = (h2 + 2 s2)1/2, An = 2 s2 + 4 h s, and Vn
= h s2. Maximum enclosed volume per unit area occurs at h = s.
H. For a right hexagonal prismatic device (Fig. 5.4) with six equal
sides of length s and height h, then Ln = (h2 + 4 s2)1/2, An = 6 s
(h + 31/2 s / 2), and Vn = 271/2 s2 h / 2. Maximum enclosed
volume per unit area occurs at h = 21/2 s.
I. For a truncated octahedral device (Fig. 5.5) of edge s, then Ln =
(101/2) s, An = (6 + 4321/2) s2, and Vn = (1281/2) s3.
J. For a rhombic dodecahedron1101 (Fig. 5.6) of edge s, then Ln =
(481/2 / 3) s, An ~ (11.3137) s2, and Vn ~ (3.0792) s3.
K. For a nonregular octahedron (Fig. 5.8) of equatorial edge s and
vertex edge (31/2 / 2) s, then Ln = (21/2) s, An = (81/2) s2, and Vn
= (1/3) s3.
L. For a regular octahedron1101 (Fig. 5.9) of edge s, then Ln =
(21/2) s, An = (121/2)s2, and Vn = (21/2 / 3) s3.
Table 5.1, computed using the above relations, confirms that
spheres offer the greatest storage volume per unit surface area and
thus are the most efficient shape for this application.
5.2.2 Actively Swimming Nanodevices
Nanodevices of another class may swim rapidly through the
bloodstream. It should be possible to navigate even the fastest-moving
arterial flows if desired. This locomotive capability is risky to the
patient if employed by large numbers of devices simultaneously
(Section 9.4.1), and may not be necessary for many of the applications
proposed in this book.
Bloodstream swimming by nanorobots is qualitatively dissimilar to
surface swimming or to a submarine moving through the ocean at
depth. Unlike these macroscale analogs where inertial forces prevail, in
the microscale environment viscous forces dominate. Inertial and
gravitational forces are almost irrelevant. Bloodstream swimming
by simple reciprocal motions is not possible (Section 9.4.2.5). Rather,
it is necessary to use deformation, helical, or other drive systems, all
of which involve either a tubular shape to allow propulsed fluids to
pass through the center of the device, or an axially symmetric form
such as a conical-, egg- or teardrop-shaped spiral to minimize viscous
drag while “drilling” through the fluid during locomotion. Red blood
cells assume a biconcave shape only when in static equilibrium. In a
flowing condition, lone erythrocytes deform into the shape of a
bullet or slipper in the capillary blood vessels;362 at lower shear rates
in the arteries, multiple cells aggregate into cylindrical rouleaux
oriented roughly in the direction of flow (Section 9.4.1.2). Metamorphic surfaces may allow a nanodevice to configure all fluid contact
planes to achieve minimum drag for every velocity vector employed
and every fluid traversed.
Are conventional streamlined shapes necessary or useful for micronscale swimmers? In the macroscopic world, a body traveling through
water experiences the least resistance to forward motion (drag) if it
is rounded in the front and tapers to a rear point in the familiar
shape of a tuna or whale—the animal thus shaped meets little drag,
~10 times less than would a sphere or a person of the same size.2022
However, streamlining and special hydrofoil shapes serve mainly
A. to reduce induced drag, which largely disappears in nonturbulent
microscale flows; and
B. to reduce pressure drag, an inertial force which also becomes
relatively unimportant at the microscale.
For example, the ratio of viscous drag to pressure drag may be
computed from Eqns. 9.89 and 9.90 as Fviscous/Finertial = (12 ηfluid / CD
ρfluid) (1 / Rnano vnano) ~ 10-5 / (Rnano vnano) in 310 K water. Given that
the highest likely nanorobot swimming speed in vivo is vnano ~ 1 cm/
sec (Section 9.4.2.6), then Fviscous/Finertial  100 for Rnano  10
micron. Thus at the microscale, viscous forces predominate. Viscous
forces are determined by total surface area in contact with fluid, so
the lowest drag on a moving mass is produced (all else being equal)
by a shape that presents the minimum possible surface area to the
fluid, that is, approximating a sphere. The drag even on
extremely pointed shapes differs little whether the object is moving
forward or sideways. For instance, experiments show that the most
extreme needle-shaped bodies fall about half as fast sideways as they
do end-on.1378 Note that natural micron-scale swimmers such as
bacteria and small metazoans are typically ovoid or cylindrical, rather
than fishlike, in shape.
An examination of 218 genera of free-floating and free-swimming
bacteria3582 revealed that motile genera are less likely to be spherical
and have larger axial ratios (typically 3:1) than nonmotile genera.
Spherical shapes were found to produce the largest random dispersal
by Brownian motion, and oblate spheroids were rare, possibly due to
the increased surface area. Prolate spheroids provided a
reduced sinking speed; elongation slightly favored swimming speed,
but strongly improved the temporal detection of chemical stimulus
gradients by any of three different mechanisms—the probable
explanation for the popularity of rod-like shapes in motile bacteria
(though others3615 have been proposed).
Basic Capabilities • Shapes and Metamorphic Surfaces 125
5.2.3 Intracellular Nanodevices
Nanodevices intended to perform tasks inside human tissues by
leaving the bloodstream and entering the cell or nucleus will require a
physical configuration consistent with the particular mission and
the specialized tools required (Chapter 21). Metamorphic surfaces
may assist in cyto devices in achieving nondisruptive membrane
penetrations (Section 9.4.5), deployment and manipulation of flexible
mechanical pseudopods or motive appendages (Sections 5.3.1 and
9.3.1.6), and reconfiguration of sensors or other subsystems (Section
5.3.5). Cell repair nanorobots could adopt one configuration to
seek the target cell, a second to penetrate the membrane, and yet a
third while operating within the cytosol.
Basic device shape will not be driven by hydrodynamic
considerations because cell repair nanorobots spend the bulk of their
operational time on site, not in transit, and need move only
relatively slowly when they travel between worksites (Chapter 21).
Nor will device shape be governed by tessellation rules (Section
5.2.4), since these machines will normally spend most of their time
in solitary activity or at least out of direct physical contact with
other nanorobots working nearby (Chapter 21). Thus the strongest
purely geometric influence on these most complex of nanodevices
may be volume storage efficiency. A spherical shape or near-spherical
icosahedral shape (as in many viruses) can contain the largest possible
mass of nanocomputers, mass memory, power supplies, repair
consumables, specialized tools, communications and navigational
equipment, and so forth.
However, cellular repair machines may also need to dock with
other nanomachines at irregular intervals to receive supplemental
materials, fuel, or information, so it would be convenient to use a
shape with a large number of planar faces across which such transfers
might readily be effected. A space-filling shape (Section 5.2.5) also
allows ready aggregation of operational units in vivo for ad hoc
conferencing plus efficient storage of unused units. A truncated
octahedron with a total of 14 hexagonal and square faces (Section
5.2.5) is the space-filling polygonal shape with the highest volume/
surface ratio, closest to the sphere (Table 5.1).
5.2.4 Tessellating Nanodevice Aggregates: Nanotissues
Some of the most important applications of medical nanodevices
involve cooperative activity by millions or billions of nanorobots in
close physical proximity with each other. In such cases it may be
essential that individual machines fit together snugly in a mosaic
pattern, or periodic tessellation, across a surface to achieve an airtight or watertight seal. The most important additional complication
is that biological surfaces are usually in motion. To accommodate
such motion, nanorobots may use inflatable or expansible perimeter
“bumpers” to achieve a continuously tight fit. Metamorphic surfaces
are used to construct these bumpers (Section 5.4).
This Section discusses nanodevice aggregates whose tasks require
them to completely occupy stationary or moving surfaces. Section
5.2.5 discusses optimum shapes for aggregated nanodevices whose
tasks require them to uniformly fill volumes with nanomachinery.
5.2.4.1 Tiling Nondeforming Surfaces
If the surface to be covered by a nanorobot aggregate has constant
area, such as the exterior of a bone, tooth, or fingernail, or the inner
surface of a passive sinus or duct, or the skull and meninges, or
certain components of the eyeball (cornea, sclera, etc.), then the
question is how to completely tile a fixed surface using prismatic
units of a particular shape, a familiar problem in spatial geometry.519,520
Orthogonally-arrayed unit circles achieve a packing density of only
78.54%, while hexagonal packing of unit circles achieves 90.70%
coverage. However, as is well-known, triangles, squares, or hexagons
are the only regular polygonal prismatic solids that can completely
tile a plane by themselves, achieving 100% packing density (Fig. 5.1).
There are also an infinite number of irregular planar polygonal
tessellations using a wide variety of tile shapes (Fig. 5.2), although
nanorobots with these shapes would suffer extraordinarily low
volume/surface ratios—an extremely inefficient use of space.
Triangles, rectangles, or regular hexagons (e.g., a roll of chicken
wire) can be used alone to tile a cylindrical surface. The deformation of
nanorobot bumpers into curved wedge segments allows tiling of
Table 5.1 Geometrical Factors for Bloodstream-Traversing Nanorobots of Maximum Volume with Largest Transdevice
Diameter Ln = 4 µm
Nanodevice Enclosed Surface Volume/ Shown
Geometrical Type r h s Volume Area Surface in Figure:
Spherical/Spheroidal 2.00 µm --- --- 33.51 µm3 50.27 µm2 0.6667 µm ---
Truncated octahedron --- --- 1.26 µm 22.90 µm3 42.85 µm2 0.5343 µm Fig. 5.5
Disk/Cylindrical 1.63 µm 2.31 µm --- 19.35 µm3 40.46 µm2 0.4783 µm ---
Rhombic dodecahedron --- --- 1.73 µm 16.00 µm3 33.94 µm2 0.4714 µm Fig. 5.6
Hexagonal prism --- 2.31 µm 1.63 µm 16.00 µm3 36.48 µm2 0.4386 µm Fig. 5.4
Cubic/Square prism --- --- 2.31 µm 12.32 µm3 32.00 µm2 0.3850 µm Fig. 5.4
Circular conical 2.00 µm 3.46 µm --- 14.51 µm3 37.70 µm2 0.3849 µm ---
Regular octahedron --- --- 2.83 µm 10.67 µm3 27.71 µm2 0.3849 µm Fig. 5.9
Triangular prism --- 2.31 µm 3.27 µm 10.67 µm3 31.86 µm2 0.3349 µm Fig. 5.4
Non-Regular octahedron --- --- 2.83 µm 7.54 µm3 22.63 µm2 0.3333 µm Fig. 5.8
Fig. 5.1. Regular tessellations that fill a plane using only one kind of
polygon.
126 Nanomedicine • Volume I
ellipsoidal or other randomly curved surfaces provided the minimum
radius of curvature rcurve is relatively large (e.g., rcurve >> Ln). For
areas containing smaller radii of curvature (rcurve > Ln), a combination
of three regular polygonal prisms may be used to completely tile
any arbitrarily curved surface: hexagonal prisms for flat sections,
mixed with pentagonal prisms to add positive curvature (e.g.,
convexity, like a sphere) and heptagonal prisms to add negative
curvature (permitting concave surface deformations). Artificial
fullerene and natural radiolarian structures illustrate this approach
(Fig. 2.19).522,523,1308 Triangular prisms can also be used to tile
arbitrarily curved surfaces; for example, some geodesic domes539
and the polio virus are symmetrical spherical arrangements of
alternating triangles.384 (Many viruses are regular icosahedra.)
5.2.4.2 Tiling Deforming Surfaces
Most physiological surfaces are subject to periodic deformation,
or stretching, along one or both dimensions. Consider the problem
of tiling a surface that is periodically deforming in one direction
only. A good example in human physiology is the large elastic arteries which circumferentially distend and contract as they absorb ~50%
of the stroke volume of each ventricular ejection. Specifically,
diameter oscillations in the pulmonary artery and aorta typically
range from 9%-12%, averaging 11% for men and women under 35
years of age and 6.5% for people over 65.521 By contrast, vessel
lengths display almost no variation at all.361,521
In order to tile such a monoaxially deforming surface, individual
nanorobots must have the ability to expand in one dimension only,
using their inflatable bumpers. The nanodevice shape which requires
the smallest bumpers (i.e., minimum volume) to accommodate a
given linear expansion is the most space-usage efficient and is probably
preferred. Assuming continuous perimeter bumpers, compare a series
of N square, hexagonal, or triangular prismatic nanorobots with
equal sides of length s, height h, and fully contracted bumpers of
minimum depth b (Fig. 5.3). The center-to-center linear distance
between adjacent square units is L0 = s + 2b; between adjacent
hexagonal units along the stretch axis, L0 = 3s/2 + 3b/31/2; and
between adjacent triangular units along the stretch axis, L0 = s + 31/2 b.
Now assume the center-to-center distance increases by ∆L along
the stretch axis. The increase in bumper volume for the squares is
∆Vs = h ∆L L0 (N-1)/N per square. (For closed circuits such as
complete circular rings of tiles, the (N-1)/N factor drops out.) The
useful interior nanorobot volume (in which nonbumper machinery
may be present) is Us = h s2 = h (L0 - 2b)2
. For the hexagons, ∆Vh =
h ∆L L0 31/2 / 3 per hexagon, and Uh = h s2 271/2 / 2 where s = 2
((L0/31/2) - b) / 31/2. For the triangles, ∆Vt = (31/2 / 2) h ∆L (L0 + 31/2 b)
(N-1)/N per triangle, and Ut = (31/2 / 4) h s2
 where s = L0 - 31/2 b.
We may now compare the relative volumetric cost of square (Rsh)
and triangular (Rth) device bumpers to hexagonal device bumpers
using

R V /U
V /U
27 N 1
N
(L 3 b
L 2b sh s s
h h
1/2
0
1/2
0
2
= =  ( ) −




 −
−






∆
∆
/ )
{Eqn. 5.1}

R V /U
V /U
2 N 1
N th 3 3b/L t t
h h
1/2 = = 0
 ( ) −




 [ ] + ( ) ∆
∆ {Eqn. 5.2}
For any choice of (b/L0)  0, then Rsh > 1 for all N > 2 and Rth
> 1 for all N > 0. That is, bumpers on square or triangular devices
inevitably require a larger percentage change in nanorobot volume
to effect a given linear adjustment, hence the hexagonal prism is
always the more space-efficient shape for tasks requiring monoaxial
deformations. (Squares are more efficient than triangles except for
0.43 L0 < b < 0.52 L0.)
Similar results follow from an analysis of tiling a surface that is
simultaneously deforming in both dimensions. Most moving
biological surfaces stretch along both axes at once, often at different
rates and phases. Examples include the skin (which can stretch up
to 100% before permanent damage is observed521), the abdominal
diaphragm, cardiac chamber walls (papillary muscles thicken while
shortening 7-20% during an isometric contraction362), alimentary
surfaces, and various bladders, glands and sacs. Tendons typically
Fig. 5.2. Semiregular and nonuniform periodic (using more than
one kind of polygon) tessellations.
Fig. 5.3. Stationkeeping on monoaxially deforming surfaces using
metamorphic bumpers.
Basic Capabilities • Shapes and Metamorphic Surfaces 127
stretch 5% (up to 10% in the human psoas tendon521) while
contracting slightly in width. Apparently hexagonal prisms are also
the most efficient shape for tessellating nanorobots aggregating on
biaxially deforming surfaces; the intuitive rationale is that the most
efficient shape is closest to a circle, with minimal perimeter length
enclosing maximal area. In nature, epidermal squamous cells are
arranged in hexagonal columns and onion skin cells also form neat
arrays of hexagons. Hexagonal territorial partitioning is common
among surface-feeding bird and fish species.2029,2030
5.2.5 Space-Filling Nanodevice Aggregates: Nano-Organs
In specialized structures such as synthetic bones or artificial organs
constructed as aggregates of millions or billions of nanorobots, it
may be necessary for nanodevices to completely occupy specific
three-dimensional volumes. This is the familiar problem of spacefilling polyhedra in spatial geometry.
The volumetric packing factor of closely-packed spheres of equal
radius is only (3 π2
 / 64)1/2 ~ 0.68017;519 by comparison, proteininterior packing densities are ~60%-85%.3211 The simplest way to
completely fill a volume (e.g., packing factor = 1) is to use a prism
having a horizontal cross-section of a shape that will tile surfaces, as
previously described (Section 5.2.4.1). Multiple planar fully-tiled
surfaces can then be stacked vertically to fill the volume. Spacefilling forms include triangular, square, and hexagonal prisms (Fig. 5.4).
Of these, the hexagonal prism has the highest volume/area ratio
and appears to be the most efficient prismatic form.
Only five other shapes can uniformly fill volumes by themselves
and thus may be candidates for space-filling nanorobots. The most
important of these is the truncated octahedron, similar to the
tetrakaidecahedron,1101 which can fill space all by itself (Fig. 5.5).
The truncated octahedron is formed by cutting the 6 corners off a
regular octahedron (which has 8 faces, all triangles; Fig. 5.9), making a
14-hedron consisting of 6 small squares and 8 large hexagons, with
24 vertices and 36 edges. A truncated octahedron surrounded by 14
identical polyhedra contacting and matching each of its faces forms
a solid unit in space resembling the original unit—that is, very close
to spherical. Such an aggregate with many planar facial contacts
permits easy docking, fastening, and transmission of forces in all
directions. Weyl,524 following Lord Kelvin,520 long ago recognized
that this 14-hedron has the highest volume/area ratio of all the spacefilling polyhedra (Table 5.1) and is a close mathematical model of
soap bubble froth.
Four other single-species space-filling polyhedra are known. The
first is the garnet-shaped rhombic dodecahedron, which has 12 faces,
all of which are rhombuses (Fig. 5.6). The volume/area ratio of this
12-hedron is intermediate between the 14-hedron and the hexagonal
prism; the shape is found in back-to-back formations in the planar
hexagonal honeycomb cell of the bee.519 The second is the closely
related rhombo-hexagonal dodecahedron (Fig. 5.7), which is also
self-packing. The third is the non-regular octahedron (8 faces, all
triangles; Fig. 5.8), which results from truncating a cube such that
all eight vertices are replaced by triangular faces with the new vertices
coinciding with the intersection of the face diagonals of the original
cube.519 Hence the equatorial edges are all the same but the vertex
edges are half the length of a circumscribed cube’s interior diagonal,
as distinct from the regular octahedron (Fig. 5.9) with all sides equal,
Fig. 5.4. Uniform space filling using one kind of polyhedron: triangular,
square and hexagonal prisms. Fig. 5.5. Uniform space filling using only the truncated octahedron.
Fig. 5.6. Uniform space filling using only the rhombic dodecahedron
(modified from Williams1101).
128 Nanomedicine • Volume I
which is not space-filling. The fourth of the rare space-filling solids
is the trapezohedra (Fig. 5.10).518
There are also an infinite number of nonuniform space-filling
systems in which two or more kinds of polyhedra are combined.518
Nanodevices filling space by this means would require at least two
distinct nanodevice species of the appropriate shapes. Perhaps the
best-known variant is the octet element, a space-filling unit consisting
of an ordered combination of regular tetrahedra and regular octahedra.
Unique interlocking interfacial or other features can ensure that
major subassemblies of the collective structure can only fit together
in one correct way as an aid in automatic self-assembly and quality
assurance.
Finally, many biological solids are so thoroughly perforated with
holes and tubes that they are more properly regarded as porous rather
than completely filled solids. These forms are simulated using open
packings of polyhedra arrays518 that may be employed to form
near-arbitrary networks2843 of interior voids and channels in artificial
organs, as required. Zeolites and other molecular sieves provide
excellent models of this configuration.382,2468,2469
5.3 Metamorphic Surfaces
Metamorphic surfaces are ubiquitous throughout the animal
kingdom. The best known examples are the skins of dolphins2034,2035
and sharks,2036,2037which may actively manipulate the contours of their
rubbery integuments in real time to reduce or eliminate skin turbulence and thus maintain near-perfect streamlines to maximize swimming
speed (though some have questioned this interpretation).2022,2038
A precise control of the skin may seem foreign to us because,
aside from eyebrow-raising, humans have lost volitional local dermal
mobility in most areas of the body. Many lower animals can exercise
precise control because they possess a well developed layer of cutaneous
striped muscle, the paniculus carnosus, of which only vestigial
remnants remain in the subdermal tissues of human beings. In man,
the skin is more or less firmly attached to relatively inelastic and
immobile fascia, which in turn is attached to major musculature,
bone, or other underlying structures, particularly on the extremities
and anterior chest wall.
An ability to control a nanorobot surface has many interesting
applications and implications. This Section describes basic design
Fig. 5.7. Uniform space filling using only the rhombo-hexagonal
dodecahedron (modified from Williams1101).
Fig. 5.9. Solid and folding geometry of the regular octahedron (modified
from Williams1101).
Fig. 5.10. Solid geometry of the space filling trapezohedron (modified
from Williams1101).
Fig. 5.8. Uniform spacing filling using only the non-regular octahedron
(modified from Gasson519).
Basic Capabilities • Shapes and Metamorphic Surfaces 129
considerations, specific configurations, and other useful aspects of
nanoscale metamorphic surfaces.
5.3.1 General Design Considerations
Basic design for any metamorphic surface includes a consideration
of minimum feature size, linear extensibility, volumetric limits,
areal expansion limits, and maximum distension speed. Other design
considerations include tensile and compressive strength along all
likely stress vectors at both minimum and maximum surface
extensions, and the resistance of surfaces to cuts and tears.
5.3.1.1 Dimple Size
The smallest possible feature, or “dimple size,” on a metamorphic
surface is defined by the minimum turning radius of the surface. In
most designs, this radius is determined by the minimum lateral extent
of the component blocks of which the surface is comprised.
Considerations of radiation-induced structural failure in diamondoid
materials and components10 suggest a minimum unit size L ~ 10
nm (Chapter 13), roughly the thickness of the cellular lipid bilayer
membrane. A single 180˚ turn requires a minimum of two linear
segments; the minimum structural turning radius is rmin = L / 21/2 ~
7 nm at a 90˚ joint angle, giving a minimum metamorphic feature
diameter of ~14 nm. In most practical systems, power and control
access requirements necessitate turning radii several times larger than
this theoretical minimum, perhaps ~40-50 nm. Such larger structures
should still be able to physically manipulate even the theoretically
smallest biological cells (which are ~40-50 nm in diameter527).
5.3.1.2 Keyhole Passage
The minimum aperture through which a longitudinally stretched
but laterally compressed nanodevice may pass is determined mainly
by the minimum size of its internal incompressible components,
not the minimum turning radius of its skin. The smallest working
complex nanomachines of the human body, the ribosomes, are ~25
nm in diameter; the minimum size of a ~100 pW mechanochemical
power supply is ~50 nm (Section 6.5.3). Add to this the width of
the integument component blocks and it is difficult to imagine even
the most flexible artificial nanodevice squeezing through a keyhole
less than 50 nm in diameter—roughly the maximum dimension of
the intercellular contact space.526 A design limit of 100 nm would
be more conservative.
In the macroscopic world, the octopus can stretch itself quite
thin, passing rubberlike through small holes and narrow crevasses
less than 10% of its size; arms, eyes, and even head can alter shape
and elongate when necessary, with keyhole passage limited by its
beak, the only hard part in its body.3133
5.3.1.3 Extensibility
The most useful property of a flexible metamorphic surface is its
extensibility, defined here as the percentage length increase of a fully
stretched material relative to its length at zero stretch. Maximum
values for natural materials used to construct the human body include
7% for cartilage, 10% for collagen, 30% for muscle, 60%-100%
for skin, and up to 170% for arterial wall material if muscles are
artificially relaxed.364 Linear elasticities of ~1000% are commonplace in artificial gels,528 rubbers, and other elastic materials,
corresponding to ~1000-fold enclosed-volumetric changes. The El
Tor strain of the Vibrio cholerae microbe shrinks 300-fold to the size
of a large virus when plunged suddenly into cold salt water and
remains viable in that state.384
If the shape of a metamorphic surface can be controlled to ~rmin
(Section 5.3.1.1), then nanodevices may extrude these surfaces to
define useful working subvolumes such as manipulatory appendages
(e.g., prehensile fingers; see below), locomotive appendages (e.g.,
nanopseudopods; Section 9.3.1.6), large exterior hydrodynamic
features (e.g., stabilizing fins), tools (e.g., a screw-shaped prow for
easier cell penetration; Section 9.4.5.2), reconfigurable mechanical
data arrays (e.g., Braille-like surface texturing), engulf formations
(Section 5.3.4), perimeter contact bumpers (Section 5.4), or even
entire second skins (see below). In theory, such extrusions can be
quite large relative to device size.
For example, consider a nanodevice of volume Vn with an
onboard pocket of volume Vf = f Vn containing Nb = f Vn / Lb
3
metamorphic unit surface blocks each Lb
3 in size. This is sufficient
metamorphic material to extend a hollow cylindrical (hemispherecapped) finger of diameter df out a total length lf = f Vn / π df Lb.
For f = 0.01(1%), Vn = 1 micron3
, Lb = 10 nm, and df = 100 nm (π
df / Lb ~ 31 blocks per circumference), Nb = 104 blocks in the pocket
and lf = 3 microns maximum linear extension. Thus in theory, a
finger which can extend three times the body length of the entire
nanorobot can be stored in a (215 nm)3 pocket at the nanodevice
surface. Ten such fingers, functionally equivalent to two microsized
human hands, would occupy only (10/6) f 2/3 ~ 0.08(8%) of total
nanodevice surface area and 10f ~ 0.10(10%) of nanodevice volume.
Note also that a volume Vf of metamorphic blocks could be
used to construct an enlarged second skin surrounding the entire
nanodevice, enclosing an expanded volume Ve = (Vf / 6 Lb)
3/2 if the
shell is of thickness Lb. For Vn = 1 micron3 and Lb = 10 nm, nanorobot
volume may double (Ve/Vn = 2) if 9.5% of device volume is metamorphic blocks; nanorobot volume may expand up to tenfold if
~28% of its volume is in controllable metamorphic blocks.
There are two limiting cases of extensibility. The first case is
isoareal expansion, in which total surface area remains constant while
volume increases dramatically. An example is the erythrocyte, which
under osmotic stress expands from its normal disk shape into a sphere
due to the influx of water. Volume rises from 94 micron3 to a high
of 164 micron3 when spherized, a 74% increase, but surface area
rises from 135 micron2
 to just 145 micron2
, a mere 7% increase.
The second limiting case is isovolemic extension, wherein surface
area expands at constant volume, a transition of perhaps more
relevance to nanodevices containing an irreducible fixed volume of
onboard nanomachinery. For instance, if a spherical device of radius rs
morphs into a disk of equal volume with height hd and radius rd = α rs,
surface area increases by a factor of:

e 3 4
6 area 1
3
= + − α
α
{Eqn. 5.3}
For α = 4.7, hd ~ rs / 17 and areal extensibility earea = 10.2 (1020%)
while enclosed volume remains unchanged.
5.3.1.4 Reactivity
Another important parameter of nanorobot metamorphic
surfaces is their reactivity—the speed with which they can execute a
full-range structural modification. Energy requirements are key, given
a power budget of Pm (watts) for morphing. In particular, metamorphic block velocity is limited both by the sliding power dissipation
due to sliding block surfaces of area S that are sliding at a velocity
vslide, or

v P
k S slide m
1
1/2
= 




 {Eqn. 5.4}
where k1 = 400 kg/m2
-sec (Section 4.3.4.2), and by the drag power
dissipated in driving a circular surface of radius r through a 310 K
130 Nanomedicine • Volume I
aqueous (plasma, interstitial or cytosolic) environment of viscosity
η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec at a velocity vdrag, given337 by

v P
6 r drag m
1/2
= 

 

 π η
{Eqn. 5.5}
Assuming we wish to restrict total morphing energy dissipation
to a budget of Pm = 0.1 pW for a 1 micron3 nanorobot, then for S =
6 micron2 of sliding surfaces and r ~ 0.5 micron, vdrag ~ 0.3 cm/sec
(< vslide = 0.6 cm/sec in vacuo). Using 0.3 cm/sec, the full-range
morphing action to, say, double the nanorobot diameter (~0.5
micron of radial motion) requires ~0.2 millisec for the surface of
the entire nanorobot to complete the motion.
The 10-finger manipulator described in Section 5.3.1.3 may also
extend at vdrag ~ 0.3 cm/sec while remaining within the 0.1 pW
energy budget, although a single individual finger may extend at
vdrag ~ 1 cm/sec (<< vslide = 1.6 m/sec in vacuo) allowing maximum
deployment within the cytosol in ~0.3 millisec. Thus metamorphic
surfaces in vivo can exhibit ~KHz frequency large-motion oscillations.
By comparison, deformed erythrocytes when released from micropipette suction recover their normal biconcave shape in ~100
millisec.371 Contractile gel fibers ~1 micron thick can shrink to 4%
of their initial volume in ~1 millisec when triggered by an electrochemical reaction or an applied voltage of ~5000 volts/m.357
5.3.2 Metamorphic Surface Configurations
At least five classes of metamorphic surface configurations are
readily discernible. Undoubtedly, many more may be conceived.
The structural models briefly described below are not intended as
specific design proposals but rather as geometrical representations
of alternative design pathways that could provide the desired capability.
5.3.2.1 Accordion Model
The Accordion Model is characterized by a surface folded in a
repeating-W pattern, as in a Japanese fan or butterfly wing pleating;
photographic and accordion bellows use what is known in origami*
as a “basic fold.” Point/line vertices may employ rigid hinges or
flexural members.1251 Fold geometry may be double-triangular,
triangular-square, or double-square; may consist of segments of
varying lengths; or may consist of a series of hinged blocks (Fig.
5.11). This surface remains flexible even near full distension,
provided that obtuse angles may be continuously accessed. The main
drawback of this model is its likely propensity to surface fouling in
vivo due to the large number of concave pockets formed during
flexure.
Folding or unfolding may require no sliding surfaces. Treating
the model as a simple spherical surface expanding into a watery
medium, from Section 5.3.1.4 a radial distension velocity of vdrag ~
0.3 cm/sec may be expected for a 1-micron nanodevice with a 0.1
pW metamorphic power budget. If Nsegment is the total number
of segments in a maximally extended surface of area Amax, then for
square segments of area L2 and thickness H, Nsegment = Amax / L2 and
the fully folded surface has area Amin = L H Nsegment. For L = 10 nm, H
= 1 nm, and Amax = 10 micron2 (Nsegment = 105
), then Amin = 1 micron2
and a 0.1-pW power budget allows one full-range motion from Amin to
Amax in tmotion = (Amax1/2 - Amin1/2) / (2 π1/2 vdrag)~ 0.2 millisec. For the
accordion model, areal extensibility earea ~ (L - H) / H = 9.00(900%) in
this example.
5.3.2.2 Parasol Model
In the Parasol Model, the metamorphic surface consists of a series
of overlapping plates pressed snugly together in the vertical dimension,
but free to slide in the horizontal plane (Fig. 5.12). Each plate has
at least one orthogonal stabilizing keel or “handle” through which
the segment is connected to subsurface control (Section 5.3.3) or
rigidification mechanisms. The minimum number of plate planes
is two, which allows both one-dimensional and (limited) twodimensional extensions. In the two-dimensional case, the lower plates
are allowed to rotate codirectionally under a torsion-spring restoring
force applied in the plane of the lower surface, keeping all edges
tight under the upper plates to maintain leakproofness. A modest
areal expansibility of earea ~ 0.28(28%) is depicted. The maximum number of plate planes is limited by nanodevice radius (hence maximum
stack depth) and operating specifications such as surface rigidity,
rugosity, reactivity and controllability. Self-scraping plates produce a
fouling-resistant dysopsonic design—the device simply “shrugs” in
all directions, neatly guillotining any biological adherents from their
attachment points on the diamondoid surface. Vertical spring tensions
are adjusted to keep plates pressed tightly together, ensuring watertightness even while in motion. Corrugation features can be added
to the underside of each plate to increase contact area and watertightness during plate tipping in curved configurations. Related
crudely analogous structures include systems of fixed scales (e.g.,
lizard or snake skins) and roof tile shingle patterns on houses.
Consider an annular cylindrical section of diameter D comprised
of a two-plane (p = 2) parasol surface with square top plates of area
L2 and rectangular bottom plates of area L(L-h) where h is the width
of the handle and also the minimum overlap of adjacent plates at
full extension. Then Amin = Nplates L2 = π D L and Amax = Amin +
(Nplates - 1)(L2 - 3hL), hence areal extensibility earea = (Amax - Amin)/
Amin = (Nplates - 1 / Nplates)(1 - 3h/L). For Nplates >> 1 and h << L,
the theoretical limit for a 2-plane parasol is earea ~ 1.00(100%).
Extensibility is greatly improved by using additional plate planes.
In the compact configuration of Figure 5.13, for p >> 1, Amin =
Nplates L2
, Amax ~ Nplates L (pL - p2 h + h) and areal extensibility earea
= p - 1 - (h/L)(p2 - 1), with maximum earea occurring at p = L/2h.
Hence for L = 10 nm and h = 1 nm, h/L = 0.1 and maximum earea =
1.60(160%) using p = 5 plate planes; the minimum plausible h/L ~
0.01, which gives maximum extensibility earea = 24.00(2400%)
using p = 50 plate planes, giving a maximum surface rugosity of ~98
nm at full distension if h = 2 nm.
If an external mechanical pressure is applied perpendicular to a
parasol surface, the degree of deformation will depend strongly on
various details of design. Given the extensive cabling and springloading of plates a surface stiffness of ks ~ 10 N/m should be
*The ancient practice of origami (the art of folding three-dimensional objects out of paper without cutting or pasting) has systematically explored the geometries of folded
flat sheets;1102-1105 the mathematics of origami is well-studied.1106-1111
Fig. 5.11. Accordion model.
Basic Capabilities • Shapes and Metamorphic Surfaces 131
Fig. 5.12. Schematic of parasol model.
132 Nanomedicine • Volume I
achievable, in which case a point force of 1 nN deforms the parasol
surface by ~0.1 nm.
5.3.2.3 Telescoping Model
Metamorphic surfaces using the Telescoping Model (Fig. 5.14)
consist of nested, tight-fitting congruent shapes or blocks under
tension fitted tightly into sleeves. The surface expands as progressively
smaller segments telescope out from the main body. Typical
configurations might include nested annular cylinders, sliding
“dominoes” (tethered blocks), the “trombone” (sleeved blocks), or
even a multisegment approach. In nature, centipedes, worms, and
wasps with extended thoraxes use tubular segments to achieve flexible
surfaces.
Given the many sliding interfaces and higher pressures involved,
telescoping surfaces should be carefully designed to preclude
possible surface oxidation. At high enough pressures sliding
diamondoid plates may strip each other’s passivating hydrogens,
allowing newly exposed carbon atoms in the contacting surfaces to
weld the plates tight; unpassivated graphene sheets (Section 5.3.2.4)
may be optimal for this configuration.
5.3.2.4 Flexible Fabric Model
Two properties of metamorphic surfaces are most useful: flexibility
and extensibility. The graphene sheet (of which fullerene tubes and
ellipsoids are made; Section 2.3.2) is probably the ideal example of
a flexible but nonextensible isoareal nanofabric that could be used
to wrap a nanorobot exterior with any continuous shape having
turning radii as small as 1.1 nm. The graphene sheet is a one-atom
thick purely carbon surface (no hydrogen passivation yet chemically
inert) arranged in a mostly hexagonal array of atoms with an
occasional pentagon or heptagon for curvature (Section 5.2.4.1).
This sheet has the highest tensile strength of any known 2-dimensional
network, about 50 times the strength of high-carbon steel and 1.5
times the strength of crystalline diamond (Table 9.3). It has a higher
packing density (atoms/nm2
) than any other network made of any
other atoms in the periodic table—even a 2-D slice of diamond.
The graphene sheet is effectively impermeable under normal chemical
conditions—naked carbon atoms or small carbon cluster radicals will
not readily bond with it, and even helium atoms up to 5 eV (~40,000
K) just bounce off. The material is probably extremely bioinactive
(Chapter 15). Graphene is also an excellent conductor of heat (as good
as diamond) and electricity (better than copper if appropriately
doped) along the plane of the sheet, but is a poor cross-plane conductor.
The ultimate flexible and extensible volume in common experience
is the rubber balloon, which readily distends its volume by several
orders of magnitude with an areal extensibility of ~15,000%. Rubber is
a linear polymer of isoprene (C5H8)n with individual molecules of
n = 1000-5000 heavily cross-linked during vulcanization with 1-2%
sulfur, somewhat resembling a network of coiled springs that is easily
stretched. Although isoprene surfaces are porous and bioactive, hence
inappropriate for nanorobot exteriors, Drexler10 has proposed an
analogous coiled pleat configuration (Fig. 5.15) that could probably be
implemented using graphene sheets embedded with reciprocal nonzero-curvature elements to provide the needed countertension. The
triple-pleat configuration shown has areal extensibility earea ~
8.00(800%). As with the Accordion Model, a drawback of this design
is a propensity for surface fouling in vivo due to the presence of
numerous trapping pockets.
Other more dynamic configurations of flexible fabrics may be
imagined. Graphene sheets may be unfurled from interior storage,
like a spring-roller window shade, a rolled-up sleeping bag, or a
serpentin or pito (coiled “party blowouts”). For example, R.C.
Merkle2281 notes that the minimum gas pressure differential needed
to uncoil and inflate a collapsed, tightly-coiled graphene tube of
radius R is given by:
pinflate  2 Ev / R {Eqn. 5.6}
where Ev is the energy of two graphite sheets held together by the
van der Waals forces between them. Merkle estimates Ev ~ 0.25 J/
m2 from computer simulations, in line with Kelly’s experimental
value2280 of Ev = 0.234 J/m2
. Thus a coiled tube with R = 100 nm
Fig. 5.13. Schematic of multiplane parasol configuration (tension/
compression springs and control cables omitted).
Fig. 5.14. Telescoping model: various configurations (control cables
and screw drive mechanisms omitted).
Fig. 5.15. Flexible fabric model: coiled pleat configuration.
Basic Capabilities • Shapes and Metamorphic Surfaces 133
requires at least pinflate  50 atm to inflate; larger diameter tubes
require less pressure differential to uncoil.
Fabrics may be comprised of tightly-woven 1.1-nm fullerene
tubes with the length of each such “thread” individually controlled
by winding or unwinding from numerous internal spools. In biology,
various species of worms achieve linear extensibilities of up to 800%
by changing the relative pitch angles of helically wound inextensible
collagen fibers.529 A dynamically reconfigurable support trusswork
sheathed in flexible surface materials also permits ready shapechanging; the octet truss geometry is one of the strongest known
[P. Salsbury, personal communication, 1997].
5.3.2.5 Block Exchange Model
The most difficult surface to construct is also the most volumeefficient and indefinitely extensible configuration—a surface
consisting entirely of replaceable blocks or prisms of fixed geometry. In
this model, surface blocks connected by snap-together interfaces
are disconnected, rotated, exchanged, moved, and reconnected by
subsurface block-moving mechanisms which may include manipulator
arms (Section 9.3.1), conveyor systems (Section 3.4.3), and the like.
Cytoskeletal components (e.g., subsurface actin microfilaments;
Section 8.5.3.11) are similarly lengthened or shortened by adding
or subtracting monomeric units during movement and various
intracellular transport processes. Blocks combining at least one
pentagonal, hexagonal, and heptagonal face can be removed, rotated to
expose a new face, then refastened in a new relationship to their
neighbors to alter surface concavity or convexity at will. Design
constraints include a requirement that each edge of the surface faces
must be of the same length, and that blocks should have angles 
90˚ on all edges of the face that will form the surface, so that the
face can be flush with adjacent faces [C. Phoenix, personal communication, 1999]. Blocks containing different “letters” from a pattern
“alphabet” on various faces (e.g., different Braille-like dots on each
surface, like spots on dice cubes) can also be used to post tactilereadable information mechanically on the nanorobot surface, or
individual rods in rod arrays can be selectively extended or retracted
from the surface to create tactile-readable displays similar to
refreshable Braille displays used by the deafblind (Section 7.4.6.1).
Block-built tubular members or protrusions of any other shape
may be extruded, lengthened, rotated, or reabsorbed, as required.
Internal block exchange allows periodic antifouling maintenance to
be performed, eliminating biomatter contamination of the external
nanorobot surface. Careful design should permit a waterproof
boundary to be maintained throughout the reconfiguration process
(Fig. 5.16). The extensibility and reactivity of efficient block
exchange models has already been explored in Section 5.3.1.
5.3.3 Metamorphic Power and Control
The power required to control a given section of metamorphic
surface may be provided by two simple counterbalancing mechanisms.
First, the space between an interior hard shell and the distensible
outer surface is pressurized using a working fluid such as gas or
water. Second, the pressurization force is resisted by a gridwork of
independently controllable nanoscale cables each attached to specific
sets of metamorphic surface units (e.g., Fig. 5.12). Applying tension to
a cable causes the units to which it is attached to selectively retract;
releasing tension allows those same units to distend. This system is
crudely analogous to the system of circular and longitudinal muscle
fibers found in the intestines, and to the hydrostatic skeleton found
in small marine organisms such as earthworms, nematodes, and to
a lesser extent in echinoderms, some molluscs, caterpillars and spiders.364
A counterbalanced surface reverts to its compact shape in the event
of a physical breach with escape of working fluid, an important fail-safe
design element.
Fully inflating one of the 3-micron long metamorphic fingers
described in Section 5.3.1.3 requires filling its 0.015 micron3 interior
volume with ~700,000 molecules of N2 gas at a 2-atm working
pressure, accomplished in 70 millisec within a 0.1 pW power budget
using a bank of 10 sorting rotors (Section 3.4.2). This gas may be
stored onboard in a (41 nm)3 (~0.00007 micron3
) pressure vessel at
1000 atm (Table 10.2). If energy efficiency is the primary concern,
it should be possible to recover most of the compressive sorting
power using a generator subsystem to charge an energy storage buffer
as the gas passes from the high to the low pressure regime. If distension
speed is the primary design goal, gas may be rapidly vented from
Fig. 5.16. Block exchange model (block motive and control components
omitted).
134 Nanomedicine • Volume I
the pressure vessel into the finger volume in milliseconds, bypassing
the generator subsystem.
Of course, such rapid venting causes the working gas to cool.
Ignoring the normally relatively small amount of work done on the
external medium, the temperature change during free expansion of
a van der Waals gas (Section 10.3.2) is simply:

∆T
A
C expand V V vdW gas
V gas
init
1
final
1 = − 




( ) − − − µ {Eqn. 5.7}
where AvdW = van der Waals gas constant for intermolecular attraction,
µgas is the moles of gas present, CVgas is volumetric heat capacity of
the gas, and Vinit and Vfinal are the starting and ending gas volumes,
respectively.1031 Taking AvdW = 1.390 x 10-6 m6
-atm/mole2 (Table
10.1) and CVgas = 20.8 J/mole-K for N2 gas, and from the above
example µgas = 1.2 x 10-18 moles (~700,000 molecules N2), Vinit =
6.9 x 10-23 m3
, and Vfinal = 1.5 x 10-20 m3
, then ∆Texpand = -120 K.
However, this temperature change is rapidly conducted throughout
a micron-scale diamondoid nanorobot structure in ~10-9 sec (Section
4.6.1), since diamond is ~3200 times more thermally conductive than
water. The maximum instantaneous temperature decline in a
Vnanorobot ~ 1 micron3 block of diamond with CVdiamond = 1.82 x
106 joules/m3
-K is only ∆Tcool = ∆Texpand CV µgas / Vnanorobot
CVdiamond = 0.0016 K, below biologically detectable limits (Section
4.6.1).
Controlled power transmission may also be achieved by dividing
the extensible surface into compartments, then pressurizing or
decompressing adjacent compartments to produce differential
movement, or triggering contractile gels in various compartments;
by manipulating tension to tendon bundles affixed to the end of a
lengthy protuberance to control tip position (Section 9.3.1.2); by
mechanically rotating an internal ribcage consisting of noncoplanar
ovate sections; by acoustically triggering a progression of locks and
ratchets; or by using telescoping screw drives (Section 9.3.1.4) or
electrostatic drives (Section 6.3.5) to extend or retract specific surface
segments. In biology, butterflies exemplify the first of these methods.
Upon emerging from its pupal skin, the insect pulls its abdominal
segments inward to raise its blood pressure, which inflates the veins
of the wings and expands their membranes.2022
The dexterity of a controlled protuberance will depend upon
the fineness of the control mechanism, the stiffness of the metamorphic configuration, the degree and speed of extension, the applied
tip load, special jointing and numerous other factors; ~0.1-1 nm
positioning accuracy and application of nanonewton forces at the
tip should be feasible. Pressure-driven ratchets may transduce acoustic
power/control pulses transmitted internally to sensors or end effectors
located at the tip.
5.3.4 Engulf Formations
Flexible nanomachines may adopt special physical configurations
optimally suited for the defense of the human body. Cytocidal
mechanisms are discussed in Section 10.4, but consider here a metamorphic spherical nanorobot of radius rs which reshapes itself into
a thin disk of equal volume, thickness hd, and radius rd = (4 rs
3
 / 3
hd)
1/2. This accomplished, the nanodevice next folds itself into a
hollow ball, enclosing a spherical cavity of radius r = rd / 2. Areal
extensibility earea required to complete the first transformation, the
principal source of surface stretching, is given by Eqn. 5.3.
Thus a spherical nanorobot 4 microns in diameter (rs = 2 microns),
after first flattening itself into a pancake that is hd ~ 0.1 micron
thick with earea ~ 12.00(1200%), can then curl into a hollow ball
and completely surround a spherical biomass ~8 microns in diameter.
This is large enough to engulf virus particles, most known bacteria,
most in vivo nanodevices, and most of the formed elements in human
blood including platelets, erythrocytes, and lymphocytes.
5.3.5 Reconfiguring Surface-Penetrating Elements
The ability to reshape a nanodevice surface implies that some
configurational flexibility of external components is required. It must
be possible to add, remove, or reposition stable nanodevice elements
whose function requires penetrating the metamorphic surface,
including sensors (Chapter 4), manipulators (Section 9.3), sorting
rotor banks (Section 3.4.2), antigen semaphores (Section 5.3.6),
and bulk material intake and outlet ports. A schematic of the process
for removing such an element from the surface while maintaining
watertightness is shown in Figure 5.17; to install an element, the
process is reversed.
Some limited configurational flexibility of internal nanorobot
components may also be useful but should be restricted to nonessential
or insensitive systems to avoid unnecessarily multiplying system
complexity. Any movable trusswork should rotate around a
configurationally stable core. Storage areas, nanofactory work volumes,
pressure vessels, fluid/tool transfer pathways, and voids are the easiest
internal elements to compress or reshape during a nanodevice
reconfiguration event. Internal transfer stream mechanisms like
conveyor belts may be designed modularly to permit limited
modifications of device functionality. A few special purpose internal
subsystems may tolerate positional or rotational uncertainty. For
example, a clocking subsystem emitting a synchronizing periodic
omnidirectional acoustic click may lie in any orientation within the
Fig. 5.17. Schematic representation of a watertight block surface
reconfiguration: removing an embedded sensor element (block motive
and control components omitted).
Basic Capabilities • Shapes and Metamorphic Surfaces 135
nanorobot; acoustic transit time across a 1-micron diamondoid
nanorobot is ~10-10 sec < ∆tmin (~10-9 sec; Section 10.1), thus the
clock may be positionally insensitive as well.
5.3.6 Presentation Semaphores
It will often be necessary to modify nanorobot surface biochemical
characteristics, as for example to present self-antigen to ensure
biocompatibility (Chapter 15), to present targeted non-self-antigens
to facilitate cytocarriage (Section 9.4.7) or elimination from the
body (Chapter 16), or to create a traveling solvation wave (e.g.,
hydrophilic, lipophilic) on the nanorobot exterior surface to facilitate
cytopenetration (Section 9.4.5.3). At concentrations of 1-10
nanomolar, there are 104
-105 MHC Class I plasma membrane
molecules per typical tissue cell, or ~10 MHC proteins/micron2
 at
the cell surface (Section 8.5.2.1).*
The MHC Class I molecule (Section 8.5.2.1) consists of a
~45,000 dalton glycosylated polypeptide chain crudely shaped like
a “hand” which is noncovalently grasping a 12,000 dalton
nonglycosylated peptide microglobulin (Fig. 8.33). Eliminating
anchor and attachment components which do not participate in
recognition leaves an active antigen “semaphore” component
measuring roughly 3 nm x 6 nm x 8 nm that must protrude from
the cell surface.
To present this semaphore to the external environment at a
nanorobot surface, a device roughly analogous to the manipulator
arm described in Section 9.3.1.4 may be used. The manipulator
arm includes a 7-nm diameter internal tool transport channel which
can allow presentation and exchange of MHC-like molecules
mounted on diamondoid jigs to the ~700 nm2 device tip, where
they may be locked into position for temporary display. Total
presentation mechanism volume is ~105 nm3
, plus ~200 nm3 per
antigen stored on board. Staggered arrays of presentation ligands
mounted on pistons can create nanorobot surfaces with controlled
spatially structured chemical characteristics (Fig. 5.18).
An alternative method involves a two-roller mill-type device using a
continuous conveyor belt 80 nm in length with 10 antigen-binding
jigs mounted on the belt spaced ~5 nm apart. An opening at one
end allows exposure of one antigen at a time to the external
environment. Each of the 10 antigens, all of which may be different,
are rotated into place as required, under computer control. As with
the previous system, existing bound antigens may be exchanged
internally using mill-like mechanisms. The core of the device measures
10 nm x 30 nm x 50 nm ~ 15,000 nm3
, or ~50,000 nm3 including
drive and control mechanisms and housing, with a ~300 nm2
presentation face. Assuming a ~105 watt/m3 power requirement
(Section 6.5.6), power dissipation is ~10-17 watts per semaphore or
~0.03 pW/micron2
.
Either semaphore device has an external presentation surface area
<1000 nm2
. Providing the requisite ~10 antigens/micron2
 requires
at most ~1% of nanorobot surface committed to semaphores, or
~0.1% of the volume of a 1 micron3 nanorobot for all semaphore
devices, excluding antigen storage.
5.3.7 Chromatic Modification
The external surface color of nanodevices and their macroscopic
aggregates is also subject to design and operational control, which
may be useful in some special applications. Pure diamondoid in the
flawless crystalline form will be clear and largely colorless; impurities
commonly found in commercial and investment gemstones that
impart bluish (~0.1% B substituted for C), yellowish (~0.1% N
substituted for C), or other (e.g., blood-red, kelly green)3524 hues are
unlikely in nanomanufactured materials, as are graphitic deposits that
produce black streaking or onyxlike coloration.2641 Perception of
chromaticity is limited by such factors as the minimum spatial
resolution of the human eye (~ 0.5 arcmin or ~30 microns at closest
focus of 10 cm), the maximum wavelength of visible light (~0.7
micron), and the degree of physical proximity of individual colored
nanodevices when aggregated.
The simplest method for imparting a specific surface color is to
add a thick coating of engineered corundum. Pure corundum
(aluminum oxide) is colorless and has a hardness and chemical
inertness only slightly inferior to diamond. Sapphire is the bestknown crystalline form. Sapphire can be manufactured in a full
spectrum of blues, pinks, yellows, oranges, teals, lavenders, greens,
grays, whites, and all intermediate hues. More colors with greater
intensity exist with sapphires than with any other gemstone. The
broad color palette is achieved by replacing aluminum atoms with
~0.1% iron atoms and ~0.01% titanium atoms. Rubies, also
corundum crystals, achieve their vivid reds by replacing a few
aluminum atoms with atoms of chromium. The biocompatiblity of
sapphire and ruby coatings is largely unexplored. If this should
present a problem, a thin overcoating of transparent diamond preserves
the color effects while presenting a potentially bioinactive interface3234
(Chapter 15) to the external environment. Given the differences in
crystal structures and atomic lattice sizes between diamond and
sapphire, there may be some sacrifices in materials properties at
Fig. 5.18. Schematic of presentation semaphore mechanism. such interfaces; D.W. Brenner [personal communication, 1999] is
*As few as 210-340 MHC Class II/peptide complexes per antigen-presenting cell (~0.1 molecules/micron2
) are needed to stimulate T cell interleukin-2 production3456 and a
minimum of ~0.2 molecules/micron2 of agonist MHC/peptide complex can trigger proliferation and immunological synapse formation,3453 although a threshold density of
 60 molecules/micron2
 of accumulated MHC-peptide complexes are required for full T cell activation.3453
136 Nanomedicine • Volume I
unaware of any computational modeling studies having been performed
on the atomically-bonded diamond-corundum interface as of 1998.
In larger devices or in macroscopic aggregates, color may be created
and dynamically manipulated by embedding micron-scale lightemitting solid-state lasers in the surface. For a surface to appear a
certain color, embedded monochromatic optical lasers must emit
light of sufficient brightness to compete with other illuminated
surfaces that may be present in the visual field. The required intensity is
probably ~1 watt/m2 (Section 4.9.4) or ~1 pW/micron2
—a feasible
energy emission budget for micron-scale nanorobots. For example,
Shen732 has constructed 0.86-micron thick three-color electricallytunable organic light-emitting devices2560 which generate ~0.5 pW/
micron2 with ~1% energy efficiency; red-only LEDs have achieved
efficiencies up to 16%,1054 and larger diode lasers have achieved up
to 60%-66% efficiencies.3144,3145 Organic light-emitting devices
(OLEDs) using small organic molecules can have high brightness
(2-4 pW/micron2
), half-lifetimes of >4000 hours, and can be made
with a wide range of emission colors in a ~300 nm thick sandwich.3188
White-light organic electroluminescent devices ~100 nm thick have
produced ~3 pW/micron2 at 15 volts;1048 0.1-1% energy efficiency
is typical.1049 (Commercially available LEDs like Hewlett-Packard’s
gallium arsenide VCSEL blue-light laser chip have active layers ~10
microns thick and ~11% energy efficiency. LED chips typically have
lifetimes ~108 sec, and other microcavity lasers are well-known.3255
If surface color is a serious design objective, arrays of frequencyselective absorbers or emitters such as rhodopsin, fluorescein,
carotenoids, luciferins, or engineered porphyrins can be placed
below a thin transparent diamondoid window. Active manipulation of
covershades to block or expose these windows could permit rapid
modulation of chromatic surface characteristics (e.g., polychromatic
sparkling). Diverse surface pattern morphologies are theoretically
available;1051,3447 dynamic texture arrays can produce marked
changes in color and other optical properties.1041 Coherent modulation of the optical characteristics of aggregated nanorobots over large
areas allows the creation and control of optical patterns visible to
the human eye (e.g., epidermal displays; Section 7.4.6.7) with
~micron resolution at frequencies up to ~10 KHz consistent with a
conservative ~1 cm/sec covershade speed. The visibility of subdermal
chromomorphic devices is greatly reduced by photon scattering and
absorption processes at greater depths in tissue (Section 4.9.4). Pure
suspensions of spherical nanorobots in clear fluid will partake of the
nanorobot surface color; suspensions of nonspherical, irregularly-shaped
devices will appear milky due to scattering effects. Another design
consideration is photochemical stability, especially for nanodevices
that must operate in open sunlight or near other sources of ultraviolet (UV) radiation. To avoid photochemical damage, such devices may
require a UV-opaque surface or components purposely designed
for photochemical stability10 (see Chapter 13).
5.4 Metamorphic Bumpers
Nanorobots may use circumferential metamorphic bumpers to
achieve a continuously tight fit to neighboring devices while laboring
cooperatively in nanotissues overlaying moving biological surfaces
(e.g., see Chapter 22). Bumpers are crudely analogous to the cell-cell
adherens junction found in human epithelial sheet cells.531 In this
junction, a continuous adhesion belt (the zonula adherens or belt
desmosome) surrounds each of the interacting cells in the sheet,
resulting in a narrow adhesive zone mediated by Ca++-dependent
transmembrane linker glycoproteins. Within each cell, a contractile
bundle of actin filaments runs adjacent to the adhesion belt and
parallel to the cellular membrane, serving as control cables for this
biological junctional “bumper” system. Oriented contraction of the
actin filaments causes specific localized movement of the sheet, as
for example the rolling of epithelial tissue into a closed tube.
Nanorobots linked by narrow equatorial-band or wide whole-wall
bumpers into nanotissues may perform similar feats, under
continuous computer control.
The other principal class of anchoring junction is the spot
desmosome, a buttonlike point of intercellular contact that rivets
together certain types of epithelial tissue cells. Each desmosome is a
spoon-shaped molecule about 30 nm long, spaced at ~8 nm intervals
across the cell surface, with the straight tail of each spoon firmly
embedded in a subsurface cytoskeletal plaque and the head of the
spoon protruding ~10 nm outside of the cellular lipid bilayer
membrane.312,531 Matching spot desmosome heads on neighboring
cells adhere, gluing the cells together while maintaining a 10-20
nm intercellular gap.
Tighter junctions (~2 nm) called occluding junctions form nearly
watertight seals in certain critical areas such as between the cells
lining the digestive system. Blood platelets are also intensely reactive
cells that respond to a variety of stimuli to undergo shape change,
adhesion, primary and secondary aggregation, and a process known
as viscous metamorphosis in which membrane fusion occurs between
adjacent platelets with the loss of membrane integrity.530
5.4.1 Nanojunction Mechanisms
Neighboring nanorobots must be able to reliably identify the
presence of others and then join together tightly into cohesive
nanotissues, forming planar or three-dimensional arrays. In
nanodevices, a broad array of fastening technologies from both the
biological533 and the engineering1614 worlds is available for design
inspiration.
For simple adhesion, micromechanical velcro,532 sticky tethers,535
magnetic latches (Fmin ~ 1600 nN for Amagnet = 1 micron2
, B =
Bmagnet = 1.4 tesla; Eqn. 4.45), or other mechanical adhesives offer
the simplest means of attachment. Interlocking mechanisms are
common in engineered materials (e.g., plug and socket, hook and
eye, distension bulbs or dilators)—many of which are simple
derivations of two simple machines (the plane and lever) commonly
employed in mechanical engineering. Hepatic cells comprising liver
walls are connected by “pegs” that fit into depressions in neighboring
cells in a crude analogy to snap fasteners (Section 8.2.5, and see
below); similar knobbed adhesive interfaces10 and docking envelopes1614
have been proposed for nanodevices. Complementary knobs of various
shapes may also be used on the surfaces of different nanorobot species,
or on different faces of the same species, to provide simple
mechanical recognition or orientational control. Judicious selection
of device shape which mandates specific mateable junction geometries
can force a large nanorobot aggregate into desired global configurations (e.g., structured nano-organs).
Pressed tightly together, two complementary diamondoid surfaces
create a strong van der Waals adhesive interface with tensile strength
~3 x 109 N/m2
; interposing scattered atomic-scale bumps ~0.2 nm
in diameter reduces this adhesion to ~3 x 108 N/m2
 ,10 or ~3000
atm (Section 9.2.1). Providing each metamorphic nanorobot species
with complementary Braille-like adhesion plates may provide either a
simple means of universal attachment or a unique recognition and
interlock pattern of great complexity. Adherent plates are readily
detached by inserting corrugated wedge mechanisms or by deforming
the adhesive pattern. For comparison, adhesion between biological
cells (as determined by measurements of the force required for
detachment of ~20-micron tissue cells by micromanipulation, shear,
or jets of fluid) is typically ~1-100 nN/micron2
.
1454,1455,1458,1459
Basic Capabilities • Shapes and Metamorphic Surfaces 137
Reversible adhesion may also be achieved using surface-mounted
matched nanomechanical manipulator arms (Section 9.3.1) which
can grasp or release their counterpart in an adjacent cell, under
computer control.
5.4.2 Transbumper Communication
Besides occluding and anchor junctions, mutually attached
biological cells use gap junctions2922 or “communicating junctions”
to exchange inorganic ions and other small water-soluble molecules
like sugar and ATP. Connexons are hexagonal transmembrane proteins
with tiny pores; when connexons in the membranes of two cells are
aligned, they form a continuous aqueous channel linking the two
cell interiors that can open and close in a way similar to the
acetylcholine receptor channel described in Section 3.3.3. When
the calcium level of a cell rises—often a signal that the cell is sick or
compromised—connexons close and quarantine the unhealthy
neighbor.312 A force of 6-10 pN is required to physically pry apart
each connexin-32 hepatic cell gap junction unit, each unit a combined
pair of hexagonal cylinders ~7.5 nm in height and 7 nm in diameter
with a 2-nm pore through the center.1223 Another communicative
adhesive mechanism is provided by bacterial sex pili,1588,3549
filamentous surface adhesive organelles that are long thin hollow
protein tubes (typically ~300 per cell) with sticky receptors on their
ends that bind to recipient cell walls, allowing DNA to pass from
cell to cell.2328 Integrins (Section 8.5.2.2) mediate cell binding to
extracellular matrix and anchorage-dependence mechanical signals.718
Similar mechanisms may be employed in metamorphic bumper
walls to establish stable physical conduits among neighboring
nanorobots in an array. Such conduits may transmit information,
materials, nanoscale components, power (acoustic or hydraulic), or
even structural forces (including tension, compression or torsion)
to provide stability or movement of the entire nanotissue assemblage.
Hinges534 and related mechanisms allow contact to be maintained
as the metamorphic surface expands, contracts, twists or translates.
5.4.3 Bumper Mechanics
Methods of inflation and deflation of metamorphic volumes have
been described in Section 5.3.3. Interbumper connection forces may
be 107
-109 N/m2
, easily exceeding potentially disruptive forces
typically encountered inside the human body. Consistent with
available power resources and likely operating environments, metamorphic bumpers may be driven at frequencies of 10-1000 Hz at
full-range amplitude, or faster in cases of limited-range amplitude
oscillations. This response rate matches or exceeds the speeds of all
important mechanical tissue movements found in the human body
including respiration (0.1-1 Hz), pulse (1-2 Hz), muscle contractions
during violent exercise (1-10 Hz) or tetanic contractions (15-60
Hz), and even nerve cell discharge events (5-100 Hz). The fastest
known animal muscle speeds739 are found in the ~90 Hz rattleshaker of the western diamondback rattlesnake;1245 the ~90 Hz
hummingbird wingbeat; the ~200 Hz toadfish swim bladder;1245
the synchronous muscle contractions of the katydid, Neoconocephalus
robustus, at 212 Hz,3161 and the cicada, Chlorocysta viridis, at 224
Hz;3162 and finally the record 1046-2200 Hz wingbeat of the tiny
midge Forcipomyia.
739,2033
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 6
Power
6.1 Nanodevice Energy Resources
Device energetics may represent the most serious limitation
in nanorobot design. Almost all medical nanodevices will
be actively powered. Mechanical motions, pumping,
chemical transformations and the like all require the expenditure of
energy, measured in joules. Even a drug molecule interaction with a
biological receptor site reduces free energy by ~50 kT (Section 3.5.2)
or ~210 zJ (1 zeptojoule (zJ) = 10-21 joule) at 310 K. Heat dissipation is
also a major consideration in nanomachine design, particularly when
large numbers of nanomachines are deployed. Power, of course, is
the rate of energy consumption or production, measured in joules/
sec or watts.
Energy, like money, has both a storage and a transactional character.
Section 6.2 reviews the various forms of stored energy that may be
accessible to working nanodevices in vivo. Section 6.3 describes how
one form of energy can be converted into another form, while
Section 6.4 discusses how energy may be transmitted from one place
to another—both representing the transactional aspect of energy use.
Section 6.5 closes the Chapter with an enumeration of issues and
techniques useful in assessing energy requirements and
performance restrictions in medical nanodevice design.
6.2 Energy Storage
For medical nanorobots, onboard volume is a precious and limited
commodity. Viscous forces dominate inertial and gravitational forces,
so mass is almost irrelevant. Hence energy stored per unit volume
(joules/m3
) is an appropriate figure of merit for nanoscale energy
storage devices.
Energy storage devices may be required to maintain temporary
power during subsystem failures, metamorphic transitions, or during
temporary unavailability of environmental energy resources; to
provide supplementary supplies during brief periods of overcapacity
consumption; or to buffer normal energy usage among subsystems
generating large fluctuations. Stored energy may also be used to
power short-lived medical nanodevices on missions of limited
duration. For example, a 1 micron3 storage device with storage density
of 2 kT/nm3 (~107 joules/m3
) contains sufficient energy to power a
10 picowatt (pW) nanorobot for ~1 second. Chemical storage
devices (providing up to 1011 joules/m3
; Section 6.2.3) may extend
this duration to 104
 sec (~3 hours).
6.2.1 Gravitational Energy Storage
Not surprisingly, the gravitational field offers one of the weakest
forms of energy storage available to nanodevices. The energy density
attainable using a storage device of density ρ and size L (height) in
a gravity field g is
Estorage= ρ g L (joules/m3
) {Eqn. 6.1}
For ρ = 2000 kg/m3
, g = 9.81 m/sec2 and L = 1 micron, Estorage =
2 x 10-2 joules/m3
.
6.2.2 Mechanical Energy Storage
6.2.2.1 Pendulums and Springs
Energy may also be stored in mechanical systems. A gravitational
pendulum of cord length r with a bob of density ρ and characteristic diameter L that is tangentially displaced a distance ∆x has potential
energy ~ρ L3 g stored in a volume of order ~r L ∆x for small ∆x,
hence energy density is approximately:
Estorage ~ ρ g L2
 / r (joules/m3
) {Eqn. 6.2}
Taking ρ = 2000 kg/m3
, g = 9.81 m/sec2 and L = r = 1 micron, then
Estorage = 2 x 10-2 joules/m3
, the same as Eqn. 6.1, as expected.
Stretched springs provide significantly greater energy storage
capacity. For example, a diamondoid spring of size ~L and stretching
stiffness ks has harmonic potential (1/2) ks x2 for a displacement x
and volume L3
, with energy density:

E k x
2 L
E
2
x
L storage s
2
3
2
= = 

 

 

 

 {Eqn. 6.3}
where (x/L) = strain and E = Young’s modulus. Conservatively taking
strain = 5% and E = 1.05 x 1012 N/m2 for diamond, then Estorage =
1.3 x 109 joules/m3
. However, strains may be applied in three
dimensions as well as in tension, shear, or torsion, so total energy
storage may be somewhat higher. The fracture surface energy of the
weakest {111} diamond plane Ef = 5.3 joules/m2
, and the distance
between {111} planes is Lplane ~ 0.24 nm given that there are
~1.8 x 1019 bonds/m2
,
10 so the theoretical maximum mechanical
energy storage density in a diamond block is Estorage ~ Ef / Lplane
= 2 x 1010 joules/m3
.
6.2.2.2 Flywheels
The maximum energy that can be stored in an axially spinning
flywheel is Efly = (1/2) Ifly ωmax2
, where ωmax is the maximum angular
velocity (bursting speed) given by Eqn. 4.17 and Ifly = (1/2) mr2
 is
the rotational inertia of a disk of radius r, height h, and mass m =
π r2 h ρ. Dividing by disk volume, all geometric variables drop out
giving maximum Estorage = (1/2) σw for flywheels of any size. Adopting
a fairly aggressive working stress σw = 1011 N/m2
, Estorage ~ 5 x 1010
joules/m3
, an excellent power density. In 1998, commercially available
electric micromotors already achieved energy storage densities of
~105
-106
 joules/m3
.
556
More intuitively, J. Sidles points out that the energy that can be
stored in a compact flywheel is of the order of either:
140 Nanomedicine • Volume I
1. the chemical binding energy per atom, times the number of
atoms in the flywheel (~same as chemical energy storage), or
2. the yield stress of the material comprising the flywheel, times
the volume.
Both methods give estimates that agree to within an order of
magnitude. Thus flywheels offer little advantage over chemical fuels in
terms of stored energy density (Section 6.2.3), regardless of their
size or material composition.
If high-velocity flywheels must ride on bearings of large stiffness,
this may cause sufficient frictional drag to render flywheel energy
storage impractical even for vacuum-isolated systems. Consider a
cylindrical sleeve bearing of radius rbear and length lbear axially
supporting the flywheel described in the previous paragraph with
axial bearing stiffness of ks = 1000 N/m and bearing surface velocity
vbear = vfly (rbear / r) and flywheel rim velocity vfly = (4 Estorage / ρ)
1/2.
According to Drexler,10 the drag power for a nanoscale bearing is
dominated by band-stiffness scattering as:

P
1.42 x 10 k v
l r drag
31
s
1.7
bear
2
bear bear
0.7 = ( )
( )
−
 (watts) {Eqn. 6.4}
The energy initially stored in the flywheel is:

E 4 r h v fly
2
fly
2 = 

 


π
ρ {Eqn. 6.5}
so the time required for the flywheel to lose half of its energy due to
drag friction, its “energy half-life” or τ1/2, is:

τ1/2
fly
drag
~ E
P ln(2) 




 {Eqn. 6.6}
Thus a flywheel of radius r = 200 nm and thickness h = 20 nm
(m ~ 9 x 10-18 kg for diamond) supported by a bearing of radius
rbear ~ h/2 = 10 nm and length lbear ~ h = 20 nm with maximum
flywheel energy density Estorage = 5 x 109 joules/m3 has vfly = 2400
m/sec, vbear = 120 m/sec, Efly = 13 picojoules (pJ), Pdrag = 25 pW, so
τ1/2 = 0.35 sec and the flywheel loses 99% of its energy in just 2.3
sec. A much larger ~1 micron3 flywheel of radius r = 500 nm, thickness
h = 1300 nm and rbear = 50 nm loses 99% of its energy in just 140
sec.
On the other hand, it may be possible to substantially improve
the energy storage time if a bearing with much lower drag is available.
R. Merkle points out that a spinning, perfectly symmetric
diamondoid disk made of isotopically pure carbon and supported
by two coaxial carbyne rods on either side should exhibit negligible
bearing losses and no vibration. The carbyne rod is one dimensional,
and the electron cloud along the rod is rotationally symmetric (for
single and triple bonds), so the disk cannot readily interact with its
rod supports. The major source of energy loss is off-axis rotation
during spin-up which could induce vibration in the carbyne support,
so spinning the disk up to speed may require larger bearings which
could be disengaged after spin-up.
A lateral velocity sufficient to destroy the C-C carbyne bonds
(Elateral ~ 550 zJ/bond) is vdestroy ~ (2 Elateral / m)1/2 = 0.4 m/sec for r
= 200 nm and h = 20 nm—much larger than the flywheel thermal
velocity vthermal ~ 0.04 m/sec (Eqn. 3.3). Since F ~ 30 nN of force
will break a C-C bond (Section 4.4.1), a lateral acceleration sufficient
to destroy the support rods requires F/m ~ 0.3 x 109 g’s, far in excess
of the ~0.4 g’s typically anticipated for 1-micron spherical nanorobots
in vivo (Section 4.3.3.2). Thermal noise will cause the flywheel
housing and supports to jiggle, but the phonons will be transmitted
along a one-dimensional pathway (the carbyne rod) which cannot
couple to the disk rotation. Energy losses due to rotational resistance
(as the nanorobot constantly rotates to new spatial orientations)
can be made negligible using a nanogyroscopic gimballed housing
(Section 4.3.4.1). Safety issues must also be addressed, such as
providing energy-absorbing device housings that are highly
explosion-resistant.
6.2.2.3 Pressurized Fluids
Compressed fluids can store mechanical energy limited only by
the tensile strength and aspect ratio of their container (Section
10.3.1) and the rupture strength of their valving system. A “conservative” working stress for diamondoid pressure containers is σw ~
1010 joules/m3 (~100,000 atm). Gases or liquids, either of which
are compressible, may be used as the working fluid depending on
energy density and design buoyancy requirements (Section 10.3.6).
For example, cycling between 1-1000 atm of pressure at 310 K the
density of compressed water varies from 993.4-1038.0 kg/m3 while
the density of compressed oxygen varies from 1.26-670 kg/m3 (Table
10.2). The energy stored in a compressed fluid is ~∫PdV; thus at the
~1000 atm cycle limit, the compressed water stores ~2 x 106 J/m3
and the compressed gas stores ~1 x 108 J/m3
. (Materials are thermodynamically forbidden to have negative volume compressibilities.
However, lanthanum niobate and a few other crystals exhibit negative
linear compressibilities; such materials may be used to fabricate
porous solids that either expand in all directions when hydrostatically
compressed with a penetrating fluid or behave as if they are
incompressible.1297)
For safety reasons, fluid pressures in excess of 1000 atm (108
joules/m3
) should rarely be used in nanomedical systems (Chapter 17).
Any mechanical energy storage system with readily accessible
catastrophic energy release modes that is operated near maximum
capacity (e.g., fluids >105 atm) in vivo risks causing significant damage
to nearby tissue cells in the event of device malfunction or rupture.
6.2.3 Chemical Energy Storage
Chemical energy storage offers an ideal combination of high
storage density, abundant physiological resources, and superior safety
in the event a device is physically compromised. As shown in Table 6.1
(values computed from stoichiometric reaction formulas), chemical
energy storage density (fuel only*) ranges from 108 joules/m3 to
1011 joules/m3
, as compared to 106
-109 joules/m3 for mechanical
media and 106
-108 joules/m3 for electric/magnetic storage (Section
6.2.4). Electrochemical batteries typically achieve 107
-1010 joules/m3
(e.g., 5-micron thick rechargeable lithium microbatteries have energy
density ~2 x 109 joules/m3
,
588 and tin-lithium material can reach
~8 x 109 joules/m3
).715 As of 1998, prototype ~4000 nm3 Cu/Ag
nanobatteries had demonstrated ~7 x 107 joules/m3 or ~2 x 104
watts/m3
 power density.589
Table 6.1 offers many interesting revelations:
1. Assuming “safe” ~1,000 atm storage, a pressurized hydrogen/
oxygen mixture has the greatest energy per unit mass (excluding
the mass of the containment vessel) but has almost the lowest
energy per unit volume, hence is too inefficient for
*Not all fuels require oxidizer, e.g., ATP. For fuels that require oxidizer, taking oxidizer volume into account (e.g., O2 at 1000 atm) reduces overall energy storage density
to ~7% of fuel-only density for diamond, ~25% for most organics, and ~65% for hydrogen. Also, note that Eavail = Estorage - Eactivation, where Eavail is available energy and Eactivation
is the net unrecoverable activation energy required to release the stored chemical energy.)
Basic Capabilities • Power 141
free-swimming medical nanorobots where interior volume is a
scarce commodity.
2. The classic explosive, nitroglycerine (included solely for
comparison), ranks poorly on either measure of energy density.
3. ATP, sometimes proposed as an alternate energy source for in
cyto operations,261,1259 has the lowest energy density on the list,
though its use cannot be excluded in the earliest-generation
medical nanodevices for metering out small energy packets of
known magnitude.
4. Lipids and fats generally store more energy per unit volume
than carbohydrates, proteins, or even hydrogen.
5. Cholesterol, twice as plentiful as serum glucose on a gm/cm3
basis (Appendix B), is in theory the most favored biochemical
energy storage molecule with nearly double the storage density
of glucose.
6. Diamond has the highest known oxidative chemical storage
density, possibly surpassed only by fullerene materials, probably
because it also has the highest atomic number density per unit
volume.
7. Hydrogen stored in solid form (H2 solidifies at ~57,000 atm at
room temperature, making 600 kg/m3 crystals568), yields an
extraordinarily high chemical energy density, second only to
diamond.
Combining the values for molecular energy density given in Table
6.1 with the bloodstream concentrations given in Appendix B reveals
that the chemical energy content of blood plasma (~ 3 liters in adult
males) includes ~3 x 108 joules/m3 for all lipids (~8 x 107 joules/m3
from total cholesterol alone), ~2 x 107 joules/m3 for serum glucose,
~1 x 106
 joules/m3
 for each of the common amino acids, and even
~4 x 106 joules/m3 for urea. Cytoplasmic chemical energy content
is of similar magnitude, with the addition of ~6 x 104 joules/m3 for
ATP. (See Table 6.4 for related data.)
The question naturally arises whether some biocompatible
artificial energy molecule could be added to the human bloodstream
to provide a supplementary chemical energy source for a working
in vivo nanorobot population. To this end, an injection of ~0.7 cm3
of diamond colloid (the most energy-dense chemical fuel known—
it has been used as rocket fuel) encapsulated in trillions of suitable
submicron-scale biocompatible carrier devices provides an energy
resource equal in size to the entire serum glucose supply, a negligible
~0.01% addition to whole blood volume. Ten trillion 0.1-micron3
passive carriers would have a mean separation of ~10 microns in the
blood.
6.2.4 Electric and Magnetic Energy Storage
The energy density in a static electric field of strength E traversing a
material of dielectric constant κe is given by:

E 1
2 storage 0 e E2 = ε κ {Eqn. 6.7}
where ε0 = 8.85 x 10-12 farad/m (permittivity constant) and dielectric
constant κe = 5.7 for diamond. Electrostatic motors (Section 6.3.5)
in nanomechanical systems may exhibit an electric field strength of
~0.2 x 109 volts/m.10 However, the maximum field that may be
employed in an electrostatic energy storage device is limited by the
dielectric strength or breakdown voltage E = 2 x 109 volts/m for
diamond537 (about the highest known for any material), giving a
maximum electric storage density of 1.0 x 108
 joules/m3
.
What about magnetic storage density? Since isolated magnetic
poles (analogous to the electron) are not known to exist, magnetic
field energy can be stored only in an array of aligned atomic
dipoles. The energy density of the static magnetic field of a permanent
magnet comprised of atoms with dipole moment Mdipole and number
density Ndipole producing a flux density B at 100% saturation is
given by:
Estorage ~ Mdipole Ndipole B {Eqn. 6.8}
For iron atoms with bulk density 7860 kg/m3
, then Ndipole =
8.5 x 1028 atoms/m3 and Mdipole = 1.8 x 10-23 ampere-m2
,
1662
giving Estorage = 2.1 x 106
 joules/m3
.
Only a negligible amount of magnetic energy is stored in a
magnetic field created by a permanent current loop in a nanoscale
ring of superconducting material. For a wire loop of radius Rloop
and thickness dwire carrying current I, and following the notation of
Eqn. 4.44, peak magnetic flux density is B = µ0 I / 2 Rloop at the
center of the loop,1662 so the peak energy density is given by:

E B
2
 I
8 R storage
2
0
0
2
loop
2 = = µ
µ {Eqn. 6.9}
Aluminum conductors in integrated circuits are limited to Id
~3 x 109 ampere/m2 due to electromigration; thin-film
high-temperature superconductors550 have achieved Id > 3 x 1010
ampere/m2
. Taking I = (Id ~ 1010 ampere/m2
) {π (dwire/2)2
} ~ 10-4
amperes for dwire = 100 nm, µ0 = 1.26 x 10-6 henry/m, and Rloop =
0.5 micron, then Estorage = 6.3 x 10-3 joules/m3
.
Electromagnetic waveguides, radiator cavities and fiberoptic
closed loops are too lossy or of inappropriate scale to permit direct
Table 6.1 Energy Storage Density for Various Chemical Fuels
(fuel only)
Storage Density
Energy Storage Fuel (joules/m3) (joules/kg)
ATP 1.4 x 108 1.0 x 105
H2 @ 103
 atm (g) 4.9 x 109 1.2 x 108
Nitroglycerine 1.0 x 1010 6.3 x 106
Glycine (amino acid) 1.0 x 1010 6.5 x 106
Wood 1.1 x 1010 1.9 x 107
Urea 1.4 x 1010 1.1 x 107
Methanol 1.8 x 1010 2.2 x 107
Vegetable protein 2.3 x 1010 1.7 x 107
Acetone 2.4 x 1010 3.1 x 107
Glucose 2.4 x 1010 1.6 x 107
Glycogen (starch) 2.5 x 1010 1.8 x 107
Animal protein 2.5 x 1010 1.8 x 107
Carbohydrate 2.6 x 1010 1.7 x 107
Gasoline 2.8 x 1010 4.4 x 107
Butane 3.0 x 1010 4.9 x 107
Fat 3.3 x 1010 3.9 x 107
Palmitic acid (lipid) 3.3 x 1010 3.9 x 107
Palmitin (lipid) 3.4 x 1010 4.0 x 107
Leucine (amino acid) 3.5 x 1010 2.7 x 107
Cholesterol (lipid) 4.2 x 1010 3.9 x 107
H2 @ 105
 atm (s) 7.2 x 1010 1.2 x 108
Diamond 1.2 x 1011 3.3 x 107
142 Nanomedicine • Volume I
nanodevice photonic energy storage. Energy stored in excited or
partially ionized molecular or atomic states, coherent (lasing) and
fluorescing media, and enzymatic activated complexes (e.g., at peak
activation energy) generally also lack sufficient duration or stability
to be useful, although the metastable excited electronic 23
S state of
solid He4 at 19.8 eV has a 2.3-hour lifetime and thus a theoretical
storage density of 5 x 1011 joules/m3 for 100% electronically
excited solid helium.661
6.2.5 Nuclear Energy Storage
By nanotechnological standards, the energy stored in atomic
nuclei is huge. For instance, the energy density of an un-ionized
radioactive atom of U235 is 1.5 x 1018 joules/m3
, counting the
kinetic energy of all fissile decay products in the total. Hydrogen
that undergoes fusion into helium actually provides a much poorer
volumetric energy storage density than for fission, ~4.4 x 1016 joules/
m3 (again assuming storage of fuel as molecules), largely due to the
comparatively high atomic number density of fissionable heavy
metals. The highest practical energy density would be achieved by
storing some theorized form of matter-friendly stabilized antimatter
perhaps converted to a two-phase hypergolic (self-igniting) fuel,565
up to a maximum of ~2 x 1021 joules/m3
 (fuel only) for platinum/
antiplatinum annihilation. The difficulty, of course, is accessing this
potential resource in a controlled and well-shielded fashion
(Section 6.3.7).
6.3 Power Conversion
Almost all energy available to biological processes on Earth
originates in the consumption of the highest naturally-available
energy density resource—nuclear fuels in the Sun. After transfer
across space via high-energy photons, this energy is absorbed via
photosynthesis by plant life on Earth and converted into chemical
energy stores of moderate energy density. These chemical energy
stores are then consumed by animal life and converted into
mechanical or electric energy stores of lower energy density, or are
completely degraded to heat.
Medical nanodevices join this energy ecology by consuming
onboard energy stores (Section 6.2) or by absorbing fresh energy
resources from the environment, converting these resources into
other forms to accomplish useful work and possibly recovering for
reuse a portion of this energy via reversible or regenerative processes,
then finally releasing heat as the ultimate outcome of irreversible
processes. Clearly the key to medical nanorobot power supply is the
efficient conversion of energy from one form to another.
The energy conversion matrix in Table 6.2 provides a convenient
conceptual framework with which to organize and guide our
discussion. Representative technologies are listed for each cell in
the matrix. An exhaustive discussion of every matrix element is
beyond the scope of this book. Instead, a selection of the most
important categories are illustrated with one or two specific examples.
Serial chains of multiple conversion processes may in some cases
provide increased efficiency over competing pathways, conserve
volume or mass, provide faster conversion (e.g., permit higher power
density), allow partial energy regeneration, or serve other specific
design objectives.
A note on nomenclature: In this book, energy conversion
processes are named using the source energy first, followed by the
resultant energy form. Thus a device which converts chemical energy
into acoustic energy employs a “chemoacoustic” process, and so forth.
6.3.1 Thermal Energy Conversion Processes
The second law of thermodynamics says that it is impossible to
to convert heat into useful work if the heat reservoir and the device
are both at the same temperature, as demonstrated by Feynman’s
classical example of the Brownian motor using an isothermal ratchet
and pawl machine,2611 although nonequilibrium fluctuations,
whether generated by macroscale electric fields or chemical reactions
far from equilibrium, can drive a Brownian motor.696 It has also
been suggested that reversible-energy-fluctuation converters can
obtain useful electrical work from thermal Nyquist noise, up to power
densities of 1015-1016 watts/m3
 at ~300 K.1606,1607
Of course, a reversible Carnot-cycle heat engine can extract useful
work from even a small temperature differential with a Carnot
efficiency of e% = ∆T / T. For example, a nanorobot circulating
with the blood between core and peripheral tissues may experience
a temperature variation up to several kelvins during each vascular
circuit of duration tcirc ~ 60 sec (Section 8.4.1). From this small
temperature differential an ideal biothermal thermomechanical engine
may extract a maximum power:

P V C T e%
t
V C T T
T t n n V
circ
nV2 1
2
2 circ
= = ∆ ( ) − {Eqn. 6.10}
where nanorobot thermal storage volume is Vn = 1 micron3
, heat
capacity CV = 4.19 x 106 joules/m3
-K for a device filled with water,
T2 = 310 K at the human body core and T1 = 307 K at the periphery.
The thermal store, vacuum-isolated to prevent heat loss (see below), is
equilibrated in the hotter core environment to T2, which heat is
then stored until the device reaches the cooler peripheral environment
at T1. From Eqn. 6.10, this temperature differential yields at most
Pn ~ 0.002 pW with efficiency e% = (T2 - T1) / T2 ~ 0.01(1%) and
a peak (accessible) energy density of Pn tcirc / Vn ~ 105 joules/m3
.
The change in temperature can be made to cause gas in a
three-dimensional coiled piston to slowly expand or contract, driving a
rod back and forth thus providing a cyclical linear mechanical output,
a Stirling engine configuration. The gas expansion is isobaric and
reversible because thermal equilibration time tEQ ~ Vn CV / h Kt = 10-5
sec for a conduction layer of thickness h ~ 0.5 micron and thermal
conductivity Kt = 0.623 watt/m-K for water at 310 K, so tEQ << tcirc.
(Exploiting the diurnal variation in mean body temperature, typically
ranging from 309.3 K in early morning to 310.4 K in the evening,
produces at most ~2 x 10-7 pW of power.) A nanorobot resting on
the epidermal surface may exploit the temperature differential
between skin and air, up to 8-13 K (Section 8.4.1.1) giving a
maximum Carnot efficiency e% ~ 0.04 (4%); for classical radiative
transfer (see below), the nanorobot develops a net power through an L2
= 10 micron2 epidermal contact surface of Pn ~ σ (T2
4 - T1
4
) L2 e%
= 0.04 pW.
Nakajima541 has built and operated a 50 mm3 Stirling engine
working at 10 Hz between 273-373 K producing 10-2 watts (power
density 2 x 105 watts/m3
), and has demonstrated the theoretical
engineering feasibility of microscale Stirling engines. In 1993 Jeff
Sniedowski of Sandia National Laboratories constructed a 50-micron
steam engine on a silicon chip producing forces ~100 times higher
than those of electrostatic motors of similar size.3486 (The steam
was produced electrically.) Computer simulations of a
molecular-scale steam engine have been performed by Donald W.
Noid at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.3488 A conservative and
practical upper limit to nanorobot Carnot efficiency is probably
~50% (T2 = 620 K).
Basic Capabilities • Power 143
Table 6.2 Energy Conversion Matrix: Power Transduction Technologies that Convert One Form of Energy into Another
Electrical/
Thermal Mechanical Acoustical Chemical Magnetic Photonic Nuclear
• Thermal • Biothermal Heat • Whistling Teakettle • Phase-Change • Thermocouple • Thermo- • Thermionic
 Conduction Engine Cooling • Pyroelectricity Luminescence Emission
• Heat • Shape Memory • Endothermic • Thermophoto- • Blackbody
 Exchangers Alloy Motor Chemical voltaics Cavity
• Steam Engine Reaction Radiator
• Stirling Engine
• Pulled Rubber • Self-Winding • Pressure Actuator • Mechano- • Piezocrystals • Piezo- • Fracto-Fusion
 Band Gets Hot Watch • Clapping Hands Chemical • Electrostatic Luminescence • Pressure-
• Frictional • Axle Bearing • Siren Synthesis DC Generator • Tribo- Sensitive
 Heating • Gear Train • Piezo- • Wind Electric Luminescence Radioactivity
• Windmill Chemistry
• Acoustic • Pressure • Pneumatic • Sonochemistry • Electrical • Sono- • (Explosive)
 Heating Actuator Tube Audio Luminescence Compression
• Thermo- • Edison’s • Hydraulics Microphone • Acousto- of Fissile
 Acoustic Phonograph Optical Bomb Core
 Refrigeration (to record) Modulators
• Exothermic • Internal • Alka Seltzer • Cellular • Fuel Cell • Bio-/Chemi- • Chemically-
 Chemical Combustion Dissolving Metabolism • Chemical Luminescence Modulated
 Reaction Engine • Chemical (Lipids, Battery • Chemical Electron
• Glucose Engine Explosion Glucose, ATP) Lasers Capture in Be7
• Flagellar Motor
• Actin-Myosin
 Motor
• Joule Heating • Electrostatic • Stereo • Electrolysis • Eletrical • Quantum Laser • Particle
• Peltier DC Motor Speaker • Voltage-Gated Transformer • LED/Lightbulb Accelerator-
 Cooling • Dielectric • Piezoelectric Ion Channels • Induced • UV Arc Lamp Manufactured
 Actuator Crystal and Nano- Currents • Electro- Radioisotopes
• Piezoceramics Membranes Luminescence
• Electroscope • Klystron
• Optical • Laser-Heated • Opto- • Photography • Photovoltaic • Fluorescence • Laser Pellet
 Refrigerator Gas Actuator Pneumatic • Photo- Cell • Microwave Fusion
• Dielectric • Optical Actuator synthesis • CCD/Charge- Waveguides • Photonuclear
 Heating Tweezers • Light-Driven Coupled Device • Photo- Emission
• Solar Light Proton Pumps • RF Loop Antenna Luminescence
• Chalcogenides
• Nuclear Bomb • Nuclear Bomb • Nuclear Bomb • Nuclear Bomb • Nuclear Bomb • Nuclear Bomb • Nuclear Bomb
• Conventional • Project Orion • Geiger Counter • Radiation- • Radioactive • Cerenkov • Moderated
 Nuclear Power Propulsion (indirectly) Driven DNA Thermoelectric Radiation Fissile Chain
 Plant System Mutation Generator (RTG) Counter Reaction
• Radiation • Betavoltaics • Cathodo- • Matter/Anti-
 Chemistry Luminescence matter Annihil.
A heat engine may exploit the temperature difference between
the largely isothermal human body acting as a sink and a hot,
high-capacity source of stored heat energy. Because the rate of
conductive heat loss is scale-dependent, such exploitation is not
feasible in nanodevices relying on stored heat sources unless a vacuum
isolation suspension is employed (Section 6.3.4.4). As a simple
demonstration, consider a vacuum-isolated spherical thermos bottle
of inside radius r, coated with a material of total emissivity er and
filled with a hot working fluid of heat capacity CV at initial
temperature T2. Conduction and convection are eliminated; heat
loss in vacuo occurs only by radiative transfer. In the classical macroscopic formulation, radiated power Pr = 4 π r2
 er σ (T2
4 - T1
4
) (watts),
where σ = 5.67 x 10-8 watts/m2
-K4 (Stefan-Boltzmann constant).
The thermal energy contained in the hot material is Hr = (4/3) π r3
 CV
(T2 -T1) (joules); hence the time required for half of the energy
to radiate away is:

τ
σ
1/2 r
r
V2 1
r 2
4
1
4 ~ H
P ln(2) ln(2) r C T T
3 e T T


 

 = ( ) −
( ) −
{Eqn. 6.11}
For r = 1 micron, CV = 4.2 x 106 joules/m3
-K for water, er = 0.02
for polished silver, T1 = 310 K inside the human body, and T2 = 350
K up to 647 K (~critical temperature of water at 218 atm pressure),
τ1/2  6 sec (at T2  350 K) starting from an initial (accessible)
energy density of ~108 joules/m3
; Hr = 1.5 nanojoule for a 1-micron
core at 647 K. Almost the entire thermal energy store (~99%) leaks
away in just 40 sec (at T2 = 350 K). Smaller thermos bottles leak
even faster, due to the ~r dependence of τ1/2.
Radiators lying within <1 micron of a lower-temperature material
surface exhibit near-field anomalous radiative transfer (Section
6.3.4.4 (E)) and thus exhibit different cooling characteristics than
Eqn. 6.11 predicts. Taking Pr = Panomalous from Eqn. 6.21 for spherical
surfaces <200 nm apart, then τ1/2 ~ 0.01 (h2
 c2 / k3
) (r CV / σcond
T2
2
) (seconds); for T2 = 647 K and r = 1 micron, τ1/2 ~ 10 sec using
a germanium shell but ~105
 sec using a boron shell.
Other thermomechanical transducers include sandwich cantilevers
(Section 4.6.3) made of composite materials with high coefficients
of linear expansion (e.g., heated metal bimorphs547), Nitinol or other
temperature-sensitive shape-memory alloys,548 thermally-driven
phase-change microactuators,545 thermally-powered contraction
turbines,597 and thermally-driven contractile proteins.1261Thermochemical transducers that make use of thermal energy stored as a
OUTPUT
INPUT
Thermal
Mechanical
Acoustical
Chemical
Electrical/
Magnetic
Photonic
Nuclear
144 Nanomedicine • Volume I
phase change of a refrigerant can display energy densities of ~108
joules/m3
,
1197 and a thermoacoustic Stirling engine with no moving
parts has been demonstrated.3267
A thermoelectric transducer may be constructed from a crystal
with piezoelectric properties. When such a crystal is heated or cooled,
charges are produced on its surfaces (called pyro-electricity553 or
heat electricity) setting up mechanical strains in the crystal that
produce the same electrical effect as the application of external forces
in piezo-electricity.551 Both bone and tendon exhibit the pyroelectric effect;3088 all pyroelectric materials are piezoelectric, though
the converse is not true.3089 Thermocouples are another example of
direct thermoelectric energy transduction, and thermophotovoltaic
generators are well-known.1983
A high emissivity blackbody radiator provides thermooptical
transduction at temperatures >650 K, increasing in efficiency up to
~6000 K.
6.3.2 Mechanical Energy Conversion Processes
It has been suggested540 that “simple physical shaking” may be
sufficient to provide power to nanorobots, much like a self-winding
watch that employs mechanical rectification. Material moves through
human lymphatic vessels (Section 8.2.1.3) in this manner: The
lymphatics have no direct musculature (or cilia) of their own, but
depend upon external physiological motion sources such as blood
vessel contractions and skeletal movements to induce periodic
pressures on the lymphatic vessels, moving material along via
one-way valving. Experiments using respiratory chambers found that
spontaneous physical activity or “fidgeting” consumed an average
of 348 Kcal/day (range 100-700 Kcal/day) or ~17 watts of power2935
and could be a major cause of individual differences in 24-hour
energy expenditure.2936,2937 In a nanorobot, a mechanomechanical
transducer would convert environmental motion into mechanical
energy for internal storage or immediate utilization.
Consider a medical nanodevice embedded in the hand of a human
being who is waving his arm back and forth in a perfect sinusoidal
motion of lateral amplitude Xmove meters and period tmove seconds
per cycle (tmove-1 Hz). If the mechanomechanical transducer consists of
a spring-loaded bob mass of density ρtrans, volume Vtrans and mass
mtrans whose motion is rectified using a ratchet and pawl mechanism,
the maximum velocity of the mass is 4 Xmove / tmove at the centerpoint
of the armswing, the acceleration profile crudely resembles a square
wave of amplitude Amove = 16 Xmove / tmove2
, and the maximum
extractable nanorobot power Pn is:

P ~ 8 V X
t
kT
t
m A X kT
2 t n trans trans move
2
move
3 move
trans move move
move
ρ − − ~ 2
(watts) {Eqn. 6.12}
For ρtrans = 21,450 kg/m3 (platinum bob), Vtrans = 1 micron3
,
T = 310 K inside the human body, and k = 0.01381 zJ/K (Boltzmann
constant), the constant microtwitching of human muscles of ~0.1
mm amplitude and ~10 Hz provides a mechanical energy of ~kT,
hence Pn ~ 0 from this source. Ignoring the 10 g, 1-second accelerative
impulse due to passage through the beating heart, each ~1 meter
circulation of the blood involving a ~60 sec passage from an aortal
velocity of ~1 m/sec to a capillary velocity of ~1 mm/sec, provides
only Pn ~ 10-6 pW. The twice per circuit passage through the beating
heart raises the full-circuit total to Pn ~ 10-3 pW; that is, most of the
mechanical energy in each circuit is localized in the heart.
Nanorobots with a 1 micron3 transducer resident in the diaphragm
during normal respiration can obtain Pn ~ 3 x 10-6 pW assuming
Xmove ~ 2 cm, tmove ~ 3 sec. In normal walking with Xmove ~ 0.6 m
and tmove ~ 1 sec, Pn ~ 0.06 pW; for the most violent handwaving
exercise with Xmove = 0.3 m and tmove = 0.2 sec (5 Hz), Pn = 2 pW.
All of these figures optimistically assume 100% mechanical efficiency.
Nanorobots resident in the chest walls experience cyclical
displacements of Xmove ~ 2.5 cm and tmove ~ 3.3 sec (0.3 Hz) for
normal shallow breathing at 10/min, up to Xmove ~ 5 cm and tmove =
1 sec (1 Hz) for deep breathing during heavy exertion (Section 8.2.2),
a chest velocity range of vmove = 2-10 cm/sec, giving Pn = 3-400 x
10-6 pW (Eqn. 6.12) for a pendulum transducer. Another alternative
in the chest is a simple spring-loaded stretch transducer. If the
diaphragm and chest wall muscles cost Pchest = 1-25 watts to operate
depending upon exertion level, then the applied force Fchest =
Pchest / vmove = 50-250 N; an X = 5 cm displacement for a 90-cm
circumference chest cavity gives a δ ~ 5% distension. Thus a
two-phase L = 100 nm stretch transducer produces Pn = 2 δ L e%
Fchest / tmove = 150-2500 pW, conservatively taking mechanical
efficiency e% = 0.001(0.1%) to account for poor coupling and a highly
nonisotropic tissue stress tensor. Similar power levels are available in
contractile cardiac tissues, near joints that flex during normal arm or
leg motions, and in the pedal dermis during walking.
Another example of mechanomechanical transduction is a simple
gear train, which transmits mechanical rotational power from one
location to another. In one example given by Drexler,10 a 17 nm3
steric gear pair transmits 1 nanowatt of mechanical power, giving a
power density of 6 x 1016 watts/m3 with a mechanical efficiency of
99.997%. Complex hectomicron-scale gear trains have been
fabricated.558 Sandia’s Microelectronics Development Laboratory
mass-produces 100-micron motors and gears.1259 Properly designed
molecular bearings will have lifetimes that are not limited by wear
but only by the static lifetime of the bearing (e.g., due to radiation
damage).
In 1998, there was at least one unconfirmed experimental
report of direct mechanochemical energy transduction,2924 in which
the mechanical energy of stirring of water over a catalyst bed of
powdered cuprous oxide was alleged to produce H2 and O2 gas
effluent.
Mechanoacoustic transduction may be achieved by operating the
pressure-driven actuators described in Section 6.3.3 in reverse,
using an oscillating mechanical energy input such as a reciprocating
rod to drive the piston. See Section 7.2.2.1 for a more complete
treatment of the vibrating piston acoustic radiator.
Mechanoelectric transduction is commonplace in atomic force
microscope (AFM) sensors using piezoresistive cantilevers that produce
a varying electrical potential in response to changing mechanical
loads. Typical coupling constants (e.g., mechanoelectric efficiency)
are 11% for polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), and 35-59% for lead
zirconate titanate (PZT).993 Transduction of mechanical to electrical
signals can also be achieved by mechanically modulating a tunneling
contact junction as a mechanically controlled electrical switch, as
occurs at the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) in
response to varying physical loads. Fullerene molecules also change
their electrical resistance in response to mechanically-applied
loads, providing mechanoelectrical switching (Section 10.2.2).
Alternatively, operating the nanoscale electrostatic DC motor10
described in Section 6.3.5 in reverse converts it into a mechanoelectric
generator, transforming rotational mechanical energy into electrical
current at high efficiency. Cochlear outer hair cells are capable of
both mechanoelectrical and electromechanical transduction.3597
Cardiac mechanoelectric transducers have also been proposed
or tested.593,722,723,3513-3517 In 1966, Ko633 fabricated a mechanical
converter that converted heart movement into the vibration of a
Basic Capabilities • Power 145
piezoelectric rod to generate AC electric power that was rectified
and used to power a pacemaker; such devices were installed on dogs’
hearts and generated 30 microwatts for several months. Electropaced
skeletal muscles (latissimus dorsi) have been used to compress an
implanted plastic balloon counterpulsation device to produce pulmonary artery diastolic pressure augmentation.3519-3521 There are
proposals to use piezoelectric bimorphs to transform the mechanical
energy of diaphragm motions during breathing592,3516 and of the
circumferential movements of the aorta and other elastic arteries
during each pulse cycle593,3522 into electrical energy, but transducer
fatigue and biocompatibility issues were problematical.590,3517,3518
Piezoelectric fields developed in moving bones3090-3095 and collagenous tissues1939-1942 possibly could be tapped. Indeed, many
biological materials have been found to be piezoelectric, including
tendon, elastin, silk, dentin, ivory, wood, aorta, trachea, intestine,
and even nucleic acids.3089 A gait-powered battery-charging system
exploited ground reaction forces associated with the heel-strike and
toe-off phases to convert the autologous mechanical energy of walking
into electrical energy using a piezoelectric array embedded in the
midsole of a shoe.3523 Shoe manufacturers have already put LEDs in
sneakers (LED flashing is powered by footfall energy), and
hand-cranked power supplies for laptop computers were being developed by Freeplay Power Group in 1999.3185 Keyboard typing
produces 0.1-30 milliwatts/finger (Section 7.4.2.1).
Piezoluminescent crystals provide mechanooptical power
transduction, and micromachined optical shutters546 have demonstrated
mechanical switching of optical signals.
6.3.3 Acoustic Energy Conversion Processes
Most clearly useful for medical nanorobots are acoustomechanical
transducers (Section 4.5.1) that can directly apply motive power to
internal nanomechanical manipulator and computational systems.
Drexler10 has described a simple transducer that can function as a
pressure-driven actuator, which is abstractly modeled as a
constant-force spring that resists the motion of a piston moving
between two limit stops (Fig. 6.1). Such a device which experiences
a cyclical volumetric change of ∆V in response to above-ambient
pressure pulses of amplitude ∆P at a frequency νp converts acoustic
pulse energy into the mechanical energy of piston motion with
almost 100% thermodynamic efficiency when the expansion is
isothermal and reversible (e.g., when thermal equilibration time tEQ
<< νp
-1, which should always hold for νp  1 GHz).
Recognition of four additional restrictions on the net mechanical
power (Pn) available from a piston-type transducer produces a very
conservative power estimate:
Pn ~ νp (∆P ∆V - Efriction - Einertia - Edrag - Eheat) {Eqn. 6.13}
The product of ∆P, the change in pressure during a stroke, and
∆V, the change in piston volume, is the change in Gibbs free energy per
cycle.10 The piston energy lost to friction may be estimated from
Eqn. 6.4 using the observation that interface velocity v ~ 2 νp L for
a piston of dimension ~L3
, thus Efriction ~ 10-25 νp L0.6; for Efriction
< kT, L < 0.05 micron for νp = 1 GHz, L < 5000 microns for νp = 1
MHz. The energy lost in overcoming piston inertia ~ 1/2 mv2 where
m = ρp L3
, so Einertia ~ 2 ρp νp
2
 L5 for a piston of density ρp; for
Einertia < kT, L < 4 nm for νp = 1 GHz, L < 60 nm for νp = 1 MHz.
Fluid viscous drag occurs when the piston must push itself through a
viscous external aqueous medium in which the pressure pulses
are traveling. However, if L << λ = vsound/νp then the range of piston
motion is far smaller than one wavelength and Edrag ~ 0 for submicron
transducers: at νp = 1 GHz, λ = 1.5 microns in water at 310 K.
Finally, Eheat ~ kT because useful work may not be extracted from an
isothermal medium. Lmin is the size of the receiver piston for which
Pn  0.
Of course, this is a very conservative approach because much
depends upon how predictable the acoustic source is. J. Soreff notes
that in the case of externally supplied, constant frequency, constant
amplitude pressure waves, both Einertia and Eheat are negligible because
the capture of energy from the piston can be phase locked to the
incoming waves, and the piston spring constant can be tailored to
put the kinetic energy of the piston into a potential energy store at
the end of its travel. Phase locking still requires an energy expenditure
of kT for sensing, but this sensing could be spread over many cycles,
given a source with a long coherence time.
Table 6.3, with values computed using Eqn. 6.13 and acoustic
pressure estimates from Section 4.9.1, shows that a modest amount
of acoustic energy is available from normal physiological processes
within the human body, which are assumed to generate planar
traveling waves. Path length is not important here because of the
weak attenuation at such low frequencies (Section 4.9.1.3). For a
single (~1 micron)3 transducer, usable received acoustic power up
to Pn ~ 0.004 pW is regularly available from continuous sources.
Intermittent or sporadic usable power sources up to Pn ~ 5 pW are
also available. In many cases these sources would be in phase with
the biothermal transducer described in Section 6.3.1.
Large epidermally-placed nanorobots may convert the force of
wind resistance into usable energy. In theory, nanorobots may receive
Pn = (1/2) e% ρair A vrun3 ~ 1 pW for efficiency e% = 0.30(30%),
STP air density ρair = 1.29 kg/m3
, and transducer area A = 1
micron2 for a person walking or running at vrun = 1.8 m/sec (~4
mph). However, as a practical matter much less power is available
to micron-size nanorobots because there is a near-skin boundary
layer of relatively still air.
External sources of acoustic energy can also be employed (Section
6.4.1). Power pulse cycling depends on sensor design. For example,
to avoid damaging the aforementioned acoustic sensor devices with
large acoustic pulses intended to provide power, power pulses should
be shaped with a slow initial amplitude rise sufficient to gently “peg”
all sensor pistons to their distal stops, followed by a sharp upramp
to peak amplitude, then a shallow decline sufficient to gently return
sensor pistons to their proximal stops, followed by a sharp decline
Fig. 6.1. Pressure-driven actuators for acoustomechanical power
transduction.
146 Nanomedicine • Volume I
in pulse amplitude, thus safely completing the power cycle. An
acoustic-powered legged microrobot ~1 mm in size with resonant
actuators has been fabricated and tested.352,559
The Space Thermoacoustic Refrigerator (STAR) developed by
Steven L. Garrett for NASA in the early 1990s uses 160 dB sound
waves in a confined space to create a spatial thermal gradient in a
working fluid, an example of acoustothermal energy conversion.3446
Sonoluminescence caused by focused high-frequency sound waves
in water provides an example of acoustophotonic power
transduction.543,716 Acoustochemical processes are well-known in
the field of sonochemistry,625,1084,1085,1523 including ultrasonic
depolymerization. Acoustomechanical fluid-driven microturbines
~250 microns in diameter have been fabricated and operated at
~KHz frequency with lifetimes of ~108
 revolutions.1218
6.3.4 Chemical Energy Conversion Processes
The following Section describes possible energy sources for
chemically-powered foraging nanorobots. Chemically-powered
tethered or stored-energy nanorobots may have different constraints
(see Sections 6.4.3.5, 6.5.3, and 6.5.4).
6.3.4.1 Human Chemical Energy Resources
The first step in evaluating chemical power transduction
alternatives for medical nanorobots is to assess the chemical energy
resources readily available within the human body. A complete
inventory is beyond the scope of this book, but a few broad
conclusions may be drawn.
Table 6.4 summarizes major representative chemical energy
resources available within typical individual human tissue cells,
within the human blood volume, and within an entire 70 kg adult
human body. Burning a protein or carbohydrate in oxygen releases
~4.1 Kcal/gm (17 x 106 joules/kg); burning lipids in oxygen
releases ~9.3 Kcal/gm (39 x 106 joules/kg). In theory, proteins
represent the most plentiful energy resource in blood and cells, but
extensively accessing this source may require disassembly of essential
cellular structures, considerable preprocessing (e.g., denaturation and
lysis), and disposal of nitrogen-containing waste products.* Free
amino acids and short peptides are too dilute to be of much value.
ATP, usually available only inside cells with a high turnover rate, is
also of very limited utility (though it is fairly stable—one can buy
bottles of powdered ATP and store it for years in the freezer).
Fats potentially offer the most plentiful natural energy source in
the human body, providing over 80% of body heat in the absence
of carbohydrates. Unfortunately, high energy density serum lipids
such as cholesterol are not freely available but instead are present
only in three bound forms that ensure solubility:
1. chylomicrons and other plasma lipoprotein carriers
(protein-coated lipid droplets <0.5 microns in diameter), to
transport lipids throughout the body from the intestine after
absorption of dietary fat, or from the liver after lipid synthesis
to storage in adipose tissue or for utilization elsewhere in the
body;3525
2. fatty acids bound to serum albumin, to transport fat from adipose
tissue to elsewhere in the body; and
3. ketone bodies (acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate) to
transport lipids processed by or synthesized in the liver.
Anhydrous lipid droplets 0.2-5 microns in diameter are often
found in the cytosol. Excepting operations inside adipocytes (wherein
triglyceride droplets occupy nearly the entire cytosol), fat utilization by
medical nanomachines would probably require some physical
nanopipetting or other preprocessing to dislodge the lipid from its
carrier, and different energy extraction pathways may be required
depending on whether the fatty molecules thus liberated are saturated
or unsaturated, etc.
Carbohydrates are soluble in water and thus exist in free form
throughout the body. Large individual molecules of glycogen
(10-40 nm in diameter) float freely as granules in the cytosol, usually
coated with a ~5 nm thick monolayer of digestive enzymes (Section
Table 6.3 Estimated Acoustic Energy Available from Physiological Sources within the Human Body
Physiological Acoustic Maximum Minimum Continuously Available Power (picowatts)
Energy Source Pressure Typical Transducer (Averaged Over One Complete Cycle)
Within the Human Body Change Frequency Size L = 1000 nm L = 200 nm L = 100 nm
(∆P) (νp) (Lmin) (Pn) (Pn) (Pn)
Vocalization/Shouting 0.05 atm 1000 Hz 10 nm 5 0.04 0.005
Footfall impacts/Running 2.0 atm 4 Hz 4 nm 0.8 0.006 0.0008
Vocalization/Talking 0.005 atm 1000 Hz 20 nm 0.5 0.004 0.0005
Vocalization/Whispering 0.0005 atm 1000 Hz 45 nm 0.05 0.0004 0.00005
Footfall impacts/Walking 0.4 atm 1 Hz 10 nm 0.04 0.0003 0.00004
Clapping hands (vigorously) 0.2 atm 2 Hz 10 nm 0.04 0.0003 0.00004
Chewing crunchy food 0.0001 atm 1000 Hz 76 nm 0.01 0.00008 0.000006
Clapping hands (softly) 0.02 atm 2 Hz 22 nm 0.004 0.00003 0.000004
Respiratory airflow turbulence 0.00004 atm 1000 Hz 103 nm 0.004 0.00003 0
Arterial pulse 0.02 atm 1 Hz 27 nm 0.002 0.00002 0.000002
Subcutaneous interstitial cycles 0.003 atm 1 Hz 50 nm 0.0003 0.000002 0.0000003
Arteriovenous transit cycle 0.14 atm 0.02 Hz 49 nm 0.0002 0.000002 0.0000002
Capillary pulse 0.002 atm 1 Hz 57 nm 0.0002 0.000002 0.0000002
*The human body secretes urea because it lacks the necessary enzymes to further process the nitrogen. Nanorobots could make use of bacterial enzymatic or other chemical
processes to obtain energy from nitrogenous wastes—for example, by exploiting the ammonia oxidation reaction: 4NH3 (g) + 302 (g) → 2N2 (g) + 6H2O (g) + 2105 zJ.
Basic Capabilities • Power 147
8.5.3.7). Glucose is the preferred human body fuel—a nearly
constant bloodstream inventory of ~5 grams is maintained
homeostatically from a buffer supply of ~350 grams of glycogen
stored mainly in the liver and muscles. Glucose transporters maintain3649-3654 cytosolic concentrations at comparable levels to the blood.
Nerve cells can only metabolize glucose and ketones; sperm cells are
surrounded by a fructose bath, from which they absorb chemical
energy to power flagellar engines during their short-lived locomotion
(Section 6.3.4.2).
Because of its abundance, high energy density, and relative ease
of use (e.g., high solubility), glucose is probably the ideal fuel for
most in vivo nanomedical applications. A 1 micron3 onboard store
of glucose fuel powers a 10 pW nanorobot for 2400 sec of operation
without further refueling. The equilibrium free glucose mass in a
typical human tissue cell provides ~104 sec of power for a 10 pW
nanodevice; during strenuous exercise, a typical tissue cell can
normally replace its entire glucose store in <103 sec via membrane
glucose transporters, providing a continuous fuel supply for at least
~100 pW of nanorobot demand.* If this is still insufficient for the
intended application, artificial lipophilic oxyglucose transporter
structures may be inserted through the cellular membrane to provide
supplementary power levels up to the diffusion limit (Section 6.5.3).
(An additional 100-8000 nanojoules of polymerized glucose, present
as glycogen granules, may be available in some cells.) For a (20
micron)3 tissue cell, from Eqn. 3.4 the maximum diffusion-limited
glucose current is Jglu = 6-30 x 1010 glucose molecules/sec. Assuming
~50% absorption efficiency at the cell surface (Section 4.2.5), ~50%
energy conversion efficiency (see below), and that the local extracellular space has sufficient fluid volume to supply adjacent cells at
peak rates, then the maximum theoretical total continuous power
draw in cyto is 70,000-300,000 pW for foraging glucose-consuming
nanodevices with unlimited access to oxygen (e.g., onboard storage). If oxygen supplies were restricted to that which could passively diffuse through cell walls, the comparable in cyto
diffusion-limited total oxygen current would be JO2 = 2 x 1010 O2
molecules/sec, a ~4000 pW power limit. (For comparison, the basal
power consumption of a typical 20-micron human cell is ~30 pW;
Table 6.8.)
The following Sections include brief technical sketches of several
possible approaches to chemoergic power transduction. The methods
outlined are rather crude. An ideal design might involve complex
nanomachinery that has yet to be designed, which may perhaps
more closely resemble in efficiency and function the enzymatic and
“proton pump” biological nanomachines that are found in nature,
or the natural chemophotonic transducers employed in bioluminescence.3564
6.3.4.2 Biological Chemomechanical Power Conversion
Many examples of direct chemomechanical power transduction
are found in nature. Perhaps the most familiar is the mechanism of
muscle contraction mediated by the sliding of interdigitating myosin
and actin filaments—the actomyosin molecular motor.1246 Myosin
is constructed of domains joined by hinges and is powered by ATP.
The globular head domain of the myosin motor, called myosin
subfragment-1 or “S1”, is a whale-shaped molecular device ~5 nm
wide at the head and ~20 nm long, containing ~50,000 atoms (~500
nm3
). When the ATP molecule binds to an open ATPase pocket on
S1, this action causes a conformational change in the S1 protein,
which releases its hold on the associated actin filament. The pocket
can then close further, clipping the terminal phosphate from the
ATP (making ADP) and powering yet another conformational
change which increases affinity for actin. The phosphate is released
as S1 again binds to actin, pulling the pocket open wider and
triggering a ~2 millisec power stroke as the spent ADP molecule is
ejected.578 During each 0.05-sec cycle, the myosin motor advances
10 nm along the actin filament (~5 micron/sec velocity) pulling
with a force of ~5 pN, a mechanical energy output of ~50 zJ, or
~10-6 pW (power density ~ 2 x 106 watts/m3
). The energy released
in converting one ATP molecule to ADP is ~83 zJ, so the motor is
~60% efficient. A typical macroscale muscle may contain ~1011
individual actomyosin motors. The net energy efficiency of a muscle
is at most 25%, doing the greatest work when it shortens by only
~10% of its length.2022 In 1998, the myosin superfamily of protein
motors contained 15 different classes, and ~30 different myosin
species were known.2279
Other molecular motors similarly transduce chemical energy into
mechanical motion to drive the beating of cilia (dynein; Section
9.3.1.1) and to drive the transport of vesicles and organelles along
tracks within cells (kinesin; Section 9.4.6). In each case, the binding of
ATP (or GTP) induces conformational transitions in the ~12 nm
Table 6.4 Estimated Chemical Energy Resources in the Human Body
Energy Available in Energy Available in Energy Available in
70 kg Human Body 5.4 Liters of Whole Typical 20-µm Cell
Chemical Fuel (joules) Blood (joules) (joules)
ATP 2.2-4.1 x 104 1.7-3.1 x 102 0.6-1.0 x 10-9
Glycine (amino acid) 3.5-4.8 x 104 2.8-6.0 x 102 0.9-1.2 x 10-9
Leucine (amino acid) 1.2-1.7 x 105 2.0-2.9 x 103 3.0-4.3 x 10-9
Lactate 0.6-2.6 x 105 0.4-1.6 x 104 0.5-2.4 x 10-8
Glucosamine 0.5-1.1 x 106 3.6-7.7 x 104 0.5-1.1 x 10-7
Urea 0.7-1.4 x 106 1.2-2.4 x 104 1.8-3.5 x 10-8
Glucose, free 3.3-4.9 x 106 5.6-8.2 x 104 0.8-1.2 x 10-7
Glycogen (starch), granules 4.2-6.3 x 106 0.1-1.6 x 104 1.3-80 x 10-7
Cholesterol (lipid) 1.4-2.8 x 107 2.4-4.7 x 105 3.6-7.0 x 10-7
Total carbohydrate 3.3-5.4 x 107 0.6-1.1 x 105 0.8-9.0 x 10-6
Total protein 1.3-2.5 x 108 1.9-2.0 x 107 1.4-2.9 x 10-5
Total fat (lipid) 1.6-9.8 x 108 0.9-1.3 x 106 6.2-9.4 x 10-6
*If 624 micromoles/min of glucose are transported per milligram of purified glucose transporter protein molecules of molecular weight ~100,000 daltons,3656 then the mean
glucose transport rate is ~1000 glucose molecules/sec-transporter which is equivalent to ~0.0025 pW/transporter assuming 50% metabolic utilization efficiency, supplying
~250 pW/cell for a 20-micron tissue cell embedded with ~105
 transmembrane glucose transporters (membrane surface density ~40 transporters/micron2
).
148 Nanomedicine • Volume I
motor proteins, which are reversed by the hydrolysis of bound ATP
and release of ADP and phosphate, advancing the motor protein
along the tubulin track and pulling with a force of ~2 pN.1247
Another example is a component of the mitochondrial enzyme ATP
synthase: F1-ATPase, a ~1 nm rotor spinning in a ~12 nm barrel,
the smallest rotary motor known, producing forces >100 pN and a
rotary torque of ~40-80 pN-nm under high load,1234,3198 and a
calculated no-load rotational frequency of ~17 Hz with ~100% energy
conversion efficiency.2278,3198 Another strong molecular motor is
RNA polymerase, which pulls with a stall force of ~25 pN at a
12-40% efficiency. Each human tissue cell probably contains ~50
different kinds of biological motors. A different type of
chemomechanical motor protein—an enzyme called lambda exonuclease found in a bacteriophage virus—chews up one of DNA’s
double helix strands, leaving behind a single strand; the motor pulls
>5 pN while moving along the strand, and is powered directly by the
energy liberated from DNA’s broken bonds.3194
In human mitochondria, the combined TCA (tricarboxylic
acid) cycle (aka. Krebs cycle892) and cytochrome chain oxidativephosphorylation convert 39 molecules of ADP to higher-energy ATP
during the net metabolism of one glucose molecule, a chemochemical
energy conversion efficiency of ~65%.526 Combining this metabolic
process with the myosin motor described earlier would yield a
glucose-powered chemomechanical transducer that is ~39% efficient.
While all known eukaryotic motors are powered by ATP or GTP,
neither is required for bacterial flagellar rotation. Rather, the flagellar
ionic motor is a rotary device1381 driven by the pH differential
between the cytosolic and extracellular sides of the device. This ~5 x
106 atom, 50,000 nm3 motor consists of a shaft attached to a rotor
that spins up to 300 Hz (15 Hz at high load) inside a fixed stator
~30 nm in diameter attached to the peptidoglycan layer, driven by
the flow of ~1000 protons (H+ ions) per revolution. Stator and rotor
surfaces lie ~0.5 nm apart.
Figure 6.2 illustrates how this proton-gradient driven machine
works. The rotor has a set of ~100 proton-accepting sites around its
periphery which interact with 8 channel complexes embedded in
the stator. Each channel complex has two half-channels, one accessible
from the (relatively alkaline) cytosol, the other from the (relatively
acidic) extracellular space. A proton is transferred from a half-channel
to an acceptor site on the rotor, but cannot be donated to the other
half-channel unless the rotor rotates.396 Referring to the Figure to
trace one cycle, in the geometry shown in (A), site 2 is empty and
site 3 is filled, so the complex can move right but not left. If random
motion carries the complex one step to the right (B), the proton on
site 3 can move into the cytosol and a new proton can move into
the adjacent empty site 4 (C). The rotor then rotates counterclockwise
a distance equal to the spacing between acceptor sites, to relieve the
spring tension (D).579 Reversing the geometry (which takes ~1
millisec, controlled by a protein switch) allows the motor to run
backwards; this occurs naturally every few seconds in the absence of
any environmental stimulus.531The motor develops ~10-4 pW with
a power density of ~2 x 106 watts/m3
. Motor efficiency is <5% at
low load, 50%-99%+ at high load.581
Flagellar ionic motors that run on sodium ions rather than protons
have been found in some bacteria;580 no doubt other alternatives
could be employed in chemomechanically powered medical
nanorobots. Drexler10 estimates from first principles that
chemically-driven engines can be designed to operate at >99%
efficiency at a power density of ~109
 watts/m3
.
Other natural chemomechanical engines involve fluid movements, including evaporative-driven ascent of sap in plants,2031
hydrophilic- and hygroscopic-driven expansion due to water
absorption, and osmotic pumps in cells, leaves, and plant roots.
6.3.4.3 Artificial Chemomechanical Power Conversion
Chemomechanical gel actuators have been reviewed by Tatara,587
who describes a variety of polyelectrolyte gels and ion-exchange resins
used to make centimeter-scale “mechanochemical pistons” and
100-micron polyelectrolyte fibers used to make chemomechanical
“finger” actuators; unfortunately, these electrically-stimulated
transducers may fatigue after only ~500 cycles. More interesting is
the Sussmann-Katchalsky chemomechanical turbine (Fig. 6.3)—a
continuous collagen fiber contracts as it enters a 10M LiBr solution,
producing a contractile force that is converted into a torque to rotate
the shaft of the output pulley.597 The device has been patented,
Fig. 6.2. Bacterial flagellar proton gradient chemomechanical
motor.
Basic Capabilities • Power 149
built, and operated with an energy conversion efficiency of ~40%.
While it would be difficult to scale down this turbine to submicron
dimensions, it nonetheless constitutes another useful proof of principle
that direct chemomechanical power transduction may need only
surprisingly simple mechanisms.
Astumian696 has examined the use of nonequilibrium chemical
drivers for micron and submicron Brownian motors. For instance,
when ATP (negatively charged in solution) binds to a protein, it
changes the protein’s net charge. Thus two proteins that react with
ATP at different rates would feel different electrostatic forces; this
force differential can drive a motor. Astumian estimates that even a
crudely designed chemically-driven Brownian motor could move
in 10-nm steps at ~3 microns/sec, developing ~0.5 pN of force,
~3 x 10-6 pW of power, and a power density of ~106 watts/m3
. Many
types of cellular protrusions such as filopodia, lamellipodia, and
acrosomal extension do not involve molecular motors but rather
the transduction of chemical bond energy into mechanical energy
using Brownian ratchets to rectify random thermal motions by
expending chemical energy in actin or tubulin polymerization.1203
6.3.4.4 Glucose Engines
There are many pathways for glucose oxidation in the human
body, some which directly involve molecular oxygen. For instance,
the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and the 6-phosphogluconic
dehydrogenase enzymes both employ molecular oxygen directly to
oxidize a glucose derivative. Although evolution has largely replaced
pathways involving direct combination with oxygen, there are still
a number of organisms (molds, some bacteria) which have retained
these primitive pathways and a few can even be found in mammalian
tissues. For example, enzymes in the liver use the reactions:

Glucose O
Gluconic acid H O 131 zJ
2 glucose oxidase
2 2
+  → 
+ +
{Eqn. 6.14}
with

H O H O 1
2
O 166 zJ 2 2  → catalase  2 2 + + {Eqn. 6.15}
One very crude approach for medical nanorobots is to use mechanochemistry techniques to force an exothermic chemical reaction,
making a change in volume or generating heat which is subsequently
exploited to produce mechanical motion. Given that glucose may
be the preferred chemical fuel for nanomedical systems (Section
6.3.4.1), we concentrate our attention on the high-energy exothermic
oxyglucose combustion reaction

C H O 6O (g) 6CO (g)
 6H O(g) E ( 4,765 zJ)
6 12 6 2 2
2 glu
+ → +
+ = {Eqn. 6.16}
The kinetic model for the glucose oxidation reaction has not
been extensively studied experimentally at pressures >30 atm, so it
has not yet been proven that an oxyglucose mixture can be ignited
at high pressure near human body temperature at 310 K (37˚C).
Such a model could have a complex structure, such as the well-studied
stoichiometric H2/O2 mixture which shows a minimum ignition
temperature of only ~380 K (107˚C) at ~2500 atm.582
Puresugar in air is not ignited by open flame (e.g., bunsen burner,
matchstick), but readily burns if a catalyst such as ash is added.3120
Exposed to moist air below 323 K (50˚C), each molecule of anhydrous
glucose hygroscopically absorbs a single molecule of noncovalentlybound water, yielding the monohydrate. Heated above 323 K,
anhydrous glucose “caramelizes” when it reaches ~433 K (160˚C).
Caramelization is not oxidation, but rather is an endothermic
decomposition process involving successive dehydration, condensation,
and polymerization reactions, that includes the making and breaking
of covalent bonds, resulting in brown melanines3109-3111 and possibly
some carbonization.3087 At 433 K the total translational kinetic
energy of the 7 oxyglucose reactant molecules would be 7(3/2)(kT)
~ 63 zJ.
What is the minimum ignition pressure (Pignition) of glucose?
Pressures of 5,000-15,000 atm deactivate antibodies, enzymes, and
proteins (Table 10.3), and ignition temperatures normally fall with
rising pressure in combustion reactions.583,584 In food science, the
well-known Maillard reaction (“browning”)3109-3111 between amino
acids from protein (mainly lysine) and reducing sugars (glucose and
lactose) involves a potpourri of Amadori rearrangements, Schiff’s
base formations, and Strecker degradations, and occurs during heating
(cooking) and pressurization (e.g., the glucose-lysine system at 6000
atm),3108 and even occurs slowly at body temperature, producing
insoluble melanoids and glycosylating proteins during aging
(Chapter 29). Initiating the Maillard reaction apparently requires
108-174 zJ/molecule (15.5-25 Kcal/mole),3110 the rate increasing
2-3 times with each 10 K temperature rise.3111 Pressure-induced
peroxidation of lipids has been shown,3113 with browning greatly
accelerated by pressurized oxygen.3218 It is also well-known that the
hydrocarbons found in oils and greases, and many other organic
compounds, will “ignite almost spontaneously” in oxygen stored in
compressed tanks at ~150 atm.3114 Upon contact with liquid oxygen
(LOX), paper, textiles, asphalt, tar, kerosene, wood, stainless steel,
teflon, and silicones are combustion hazards, and pulverized organic
materials such as sawdust, polystyrene and charcoal,3119 and powdered
magnesium, can spontaneously ignite or explode:3115-3118 “when
saturated with LOX these materials have exploded after an impact
as slight as a footstep”.3116The density of oxygen molecules trapped
in a mechanochemical binding site at 1000 atm is 12.6 molecules/
nm3
, not much below the ~21.5 molecules/nm3 density in LOX
(Table 10.2).
Lacking firm experimental data, we provisionally approximate
Pignition as the minimum ~63 zJ activation energy (required to
induce covalent bond modification during caramelization), divided
by the total reactant volume at 310 K computed by summing the
volumes of one glucose (1.91 x 10-28 m3
/molecule) plus 6 molecular
oxygens (8.85 x 10-29 m3
/molecule at 860 atm using van der Waals’
equation; Section 10.3.2). The required energy density is 8.7 x 107
joules/m3 Fig. 6.3. Sussmann-Katchalsky chemomechanical turbine. , which can be supplied to the reactants by applying a
150 Nanomedicine • Volume I
mechanical pressure of Pignition ~ 860 atm. Operating the glucose
engine at Pignition ~ 1000 atm, possibly including durable catalysts
to accelerate the reaction, thus would ensure complete and reliable
combustion. (Note that biology already achieves full stepwise glucose
oxidation at 310 K, constituting a general proof of principle.)
J. Soreff suggests several interesting design alternatives:
1. Convert glucose to a more stable fuel such as methane (which
will not caramelize), possibly by biochemical means, incurring
some loss in efficiency;
2. precompress the fuel/oxidizer mixture in a single tank to
subignition pressures, then trigger the reaction purely thermally
or possibly by adding free radical initiators such as benzoyl
peroxide to the tank; or
3. nitrate the glucose hydroxyls, producing combustion and
evolution of N2 which must then be recycled back to HNO3
via nitrogen fixation (Chapter 19) to nitrate the next batch of
fuel.
Once oxyglucose combustion has taken place, the energy thus
released may be converted to mechanical energy by various means.
In the ideal case of an isothermal expansion at constant (P = 1000
atm) pressure, P ∆V = Eglu would imply a volume change ∆V ~ 47
nm3
, producing a ~5 nm power stroke on a piston of area ~10 nm2
and a ~1 nN applied force. Vacuum isolation of the combustion
chamber assembly (see below) helps prevent rapid energy dissipation
via thermal conduction to the external medium. Burning 106
 sec-1
glucose molecules in a ~500,000 nm3 combustion/engine device
(which includes a generous volumetric allowance for support
structure) generates ~5 pW with a theoretical power density of ~1010
watts/m3
. Note that while the oxyglucose reaction products occupy
0.047 nm3
 more volume than the reactants, relying upon this volume
change only allows a highly inefficient (~0.1%) extraction of ~5 zJ
per glucose molecule at 1000 atm operating pressure.
A complete design for a working nanoscale glucose engine is
beyond the scope of this book. However, as a concept demonstration
without regard to maximizing efficiency, one simplistic
implementation might employ a combustion chamber at the center
of a vacuum-isolated “thermos bottle.” A series of combustion events
maintains the isolated heat source at a high operating temperature,
thus providing a sizable temperature differential against the external
medium. This differential can subsequently be used to drive a
microscale Stirling engine to produce a mechanical power output,541
or to stimulate mechanical motion by differential expansion of
dissimilar materials (Section 4.6.3), or even to energize an electrical
microthermocouple or pyroelectric nanocrystal (Section 6.3.1).
A key component of the glucose engine is a stable heat source,
which requires at least five critical design elements:
A. Combustion Mechanism—Figure 6.4A shows a heat-generating
mechanism which employs two opposed sorting rotors. These rotors contain binding sites which must be exceptionally robust and
damage-resistant. Each rotor is a cylinder 40 nm tall with ten staggered rings of opposed binding sites (Fig. 6.4B). The left rotor has
binding sites which accept one glucose molecule at a time from the
aqueous fuel solution, simultaneously applying sufficient force to
strip off the associated water of hydration. The right rotor has binding sites each of which accepts oxygen molecules, six at a time.
During operation, these “crushing rotors” compress paired reactant
packets into the activation volume required for the oxyglucose
combustion reaction to occur. This reaction volume may change
shape during the compression cycle, perhaps employing a judicious
series of insertions and retractions of binding pocket rods in order
to accommodate intermediate reaction products and multistep
reaction events. The end result is to force a complete combustion at
the rate of 3 x 106 glucose molecules per second (~7 pW). Effluent
molecules are ejected into the outer jacket, transferring their heat to
the thermally-conductive structure in <10-9 sec (Section 4.6.1). The
glucose solvation water discharge pathway is not shown in the Figure.
B. Fuel Tanks—The combustion mechanism has fuel tanks sized
to stoichiometric requirements from which combustion reactants
are drawn during each 100 millisec discharge cycle. Tanks are
refilled once during each discharge cycle with a saturated 70% glucose
(aqueous) solution and O2 at >1000 atm pressure.
During refueling, the thermos structure equilibrates to 310 K in
~10-9 sec by thermal conduction through the refilling
mechanism, which physically plugs into the refueling sockets.
Refilling requires <10-7 sec. The refilling mechanism then
disconnects and withdraws at least 100 nm, after which the
combustion mechanism raises thermos temperature back to the 600
K operating temperature in ~30 millisec. Thermos temperature then
remains at 600 K throughout the remainder of the 100 millisec
discharge cycle. Presumably this cycle is fast enough to avoid glucose
fuel caramelization at 433 K inside the tank; if not, a faster cycle or a
lower operating temperature may be used, forcing a somehat lower
efficiency on the entire design. (The boiling point of the water solvent
exceeds 433 K at >6.4 atm (Section 10.3.2); at 600 K, well below
water’s critical temperature Tcrit = 647.3 K (Section 10.3.2), water
remains liquid at pressures 140 atm.)
C. Rotor Drive Source—Stacked above the 40-nm tall fuel/rotor
complex is a second O2 storage tank (~15 nm tall) at >2000 atm
pressure (Figure 6.4B). This gas passes through a simple ducted turbine mechanism which is coaxial with the two rotors, driving rotor
rotation. Spent drive gas passes into the main O2 storage tank and
Fig. 6.4A. Glucose engine combustion chamber (top cutaway).
Basic Capabilities • Power 151
is later used as combustion reactant. Drive gas is recharged, and
effluent gases are drained off, each process taking ~10-7 sec, once
every 100 millisec discharge cycle.
D. Electrodynamic Suspension—It is crucial to avoid any thermally
conductive physical pathways until the cycling Stirling engine (or
other intentional energy transfer mechanism) calls for heat. Even
the best thermal insulators such as wood, plastic and glass have
conductivities Kt = 0.01-1 watts/m-K (Table 8.12, Appendix A),
so a 10-nm cube of such material straddling a ∆T = 290 K temperature
differential conducts away the entire energy store of Estore ~ 1 pJ in
~0.1-10 microsec. Using Nrod = 6 carbyne rod supports, each of
cross-sectional area Arod ~ (0.2 nm)2
, length Lrod = 100 nm, and Kt
= 2000 W/m-K for diamond, the thermal leakaway time is:

t
E L
N A K T 0.7 microsec leak
store rod
rod rod t
= = ∆ {Eqn. 6.17}
still much too fast. (J. Soreff notes that glasslike disorder in molecular chains may be obtained by placing C12 and C13 atoms randomly
throughout the carbyne structure, rendering local most of the high
spatial and temporal frequency modes and possibly significantly
reducing thermal conduction. For somewhat weaker strands,
N/CH or O/NH/CH2 units might be intermixed with similar
effect.) Fortunately, vacuum non-contact isolation of the entire
combustion assembly also is possible via electric levitation.
Earnshaw’s theorem2172 states that static levitation against gravity is
not possible in classical physics using any combination of fixed
magnets or electric charges. However, stable levitation may be achieved
by using quantum effects (Section 9.2), diamagnetic suspension
materials,2173,2174 rotation of the suspended object as in the
levitron,2175 oscillating magnetic fields,2176 or dynamic feedback
control mechanisms. Three-dimensional electro-dynamic confinement
of charged micron-sized aluminum particles was demonstrated
experimentally in the late 1950s.654 From the formulas given, a
100-nm particle with 10 surface charges (charge/mass ~ 1) can be
stably confined to a 200-nm volume in a circular Lissajous pattern
using a ~1 volt hyperbolic quadrupole AC field at a ~10 MHz
resonance frequency plus a ~10 mV DC field to neutralize gravity. A
stiffer confinement field on micron-scale particles has been produced
inside a spherical void electrodynamic levitator constructed as two
joined hemispheres,655 and more complex configurations have been
designed.658,659 Electric suspension bearings for micromotors using
a resonant circuit driven by radio frequency AC voltage can achieve
stable levitation of charged objects without requiring feedback signals or sensors,656,657 and stable passive trapping may also be achieved
using cylindrically symmetric dielectrophoretic levitation electrode
structures.660Translational and rotational motions may be imposed
on the suspended object by applying appropriate DC or oscillating
fields.
Levitation is particularly effective at the smallest scales.
Electrically levitating an object of thickness t, density ρ, and dielectric
strength κ ε0, against a gravitational acceleration g requires an electric
field:656

E 8 g t
lev
0
1/2
= 




 ρ
κ ε
{Eqn. 6.18}
If r = 1000 kg/m3
, g = 9.81 m/sec2
, t = 100 nm, κ = 2.1 (e.g.,
Teflon), ε0 = 8.85 x 10-12 farad/m, then Elev = 20,000 volts/m or 20
mV across a 1 micron gap (~typical in biological cells). Two unit
charges separated by 100 nm in vacuo feel a mutual repulsion of
~0.1 pN, sufficient to resist an external acceleration of ~104 g’s on a
(100 nm)3 block of density ρ = 1000 kg/m3
; 104 g’s is the largest
natural acceleration imposed on objects of this size inside the
human body (Section 4.3.3.2) and is near the maximum safe
acceleration for human cells (Chapter 11).
One possible stable open-loop levitation configuration is shown
schematically in Figure 6.4C, wherein the combustion assembly is
affixed to a simple permanently-polarized dipole electret carrier
which is itself electrodynamically levitated by same-sign control
electrets positioned at either end. Thermal electrets (electric field
applied across heated material727,2177) may be made of wax, Teflon,
or Mylar; several polymer electrets have extrapolated lifetimes of
several thousand years at room temperature.727 Homocharge electrets
(electron beam-embedded charges2177) may have longer lifetimes at
higher temperatures, or other thermostable electret materials with
designed nanoscale charge patterns may be found.3099
E. Thermal Insulation. The combustion assembly shown in Figures
6.4A and 6.4B measures (110 nm)2 x 90 nm. For an isolated hot
Fig. 6.4B. Glucose engine combustion chamber (side cutaway). Fig. 6.4C. Glucose engine 3-D electrodynamic suspension (2-D
schematic).
152 Nanomedicine • Volume I
surface in proximity to a cooler surface, both surfaces of area A and
separated by vacuum, the rate of heat transfer is given by:

P A e T T classical r 2
4
1
4 = σ ( ) − {Eqn. 6.19}
with variables as defined for Pr in Eqn. 6.11; the peak vacuum emission
wavelength is given by Wien’s relation as:

λmax 2
0.2 h c
k T = {Eqn. 6.20}
which, for h = 6.63 x 10-34 joule-sec, c = 3 x 108 m/sec, k = 0.01381
zJ/K, and T2 = 310 K, gives λmax = 9.3 microns; at T2 = 540 K, λmax
= 5.3 microns.
At planar separations d  λmax, radiative power is independent
of separation distance. However, at smaller separations d < λmax,
radiative heat transfer may be greatly enhanced due to near-field
coupling of nonradiative electromagnetic modes in the surfaces.652,653
In particular, surfaces at temperatures between 300-600 K transfer
heat approximately as ~(σcond d4
)
-1 for 0.2 micron  d  2
microns, where σcond is electrical conductivity. Surfaces with 10 nm
 d  200 nm again exchange energy independent of d, but
according to:

P ~ 0.574 A 4 k
h c T T T anomalous
2 3
2 2 cond 2
2
2 1
π
σ





 ( ) − ( ) watts
{Eqn. 6.21}
The basic energy exchange relation for d < 200 nm is simply Pglu
= Panomalous + Pext, where the combustion power Pglu = nglu Eglu / tglu,
nglu = number of glucose molecules oxidized per cycle (e.g., 3 x
105
), tglu = combustion cycle time (e.g., 100 millisec), and Pext is the
working power extracted by the Stirling engine. Assuming d = 100
nm, a highly conductive silver or aluminum surface with σcond
~4-7 x 1018 sec-1 results in a negligible temperature differential (T2 - T1)
~ 0.0001 K. However, a germanium surface (melting point 1211
K) with σcond ~1011 sec-1 could allow a useful operating temperature T2
> 600 K, giving a maximum Carnot efficiency (T2 - T1) / T2 =
0.48(48%) (vs. ~25% for gasoline internal combustion engines).
With device volume ~0.02 micron3
, power density would be ~109
watts/m3
. A boron surface (m.p. 2573 K) with σcond ~ 107 sec-1
might provide even better vacuum insulation properties. More
research is required on the mechanisms of anomalous radiative heat
transfer in order to fully assess the feasibility of this approach.
6.3.4.5 Chemoelectric Cells
The human body provides a renewable source of chemoelectric
energy that may be tapped by various means. As long ago as 1959,
Pinneo and Kesselman595 reported powering an FM transmitter by
simply inserting two steel electrodes into the brain of a cat, generating
0.5 microamperes at 40 millivolts. In another experiment by
Reynolds596 in 1963, electrodes inserted subcutaneously and
abdominally into an anesthetized rat produced 400 millivolts and
~10 microwatts, powering an oscillator circuit for 8 hours with no
sign of decline.* Since then, three classes of bioelectric energy have
been distinguished: ionic concentration, biogalvanic, and biofuel
cells.
The ionic concentration cell may exploit differences in chemical
concentration by placing two similar electrodes in different
compartments of the body having different chemical composition,
generating a voltage proportional to the logarithm of the concentration
ratio. By this means, it has been proposed that power could be drawn
from the differences in oxygen and hydrogen ion concentration
between arterial and venous blood,590 or the acid-alkali differences
between the stomach fluids and surrounding tissue. Similarly,
trans-cytomembrane electrodes could develop potentials of 1-100
mV between cytosol and intercellular fluid. This would allow a 10
pW nanorobot to be powered by a current flow of 10 nanoamperes
at 1 mV through a 105 ohm load resistance, although power draws
exceeding ~100 pW might prove electrokinetically disruptive to the
cell. Also, this source may be less reliable for dying or challenged
human tissue.
Biogalvanic energy sources590,3527-3530 exploit the electrochemical
potential between metallic electrodes (the fuel) in an electrolyte
solution. Two broad classes of galvanic pairs which generate electrical
energy have been investigated for medical use: those in which both
anode and cathode are consumed and go into solution, and those in
which the cathode is inert. In the first group, zinc (anode) and silver
chloride (cathode) electrodes have been implanted in
human test subjects for up to two years. The Zn goes into solution
as Zn++; the AgCl cathode is converted into Ag and the Cl- ion goes
into solution. This chemoelectric source generates steady currents
of ~0.2 picoamperes/micron2 at ~1 volt or ~10 pW/50 microns2 of
electrode surface at 70%-90% efficiency, an energy density of 107
watts/m3 assuming 20-nm thick electrodes. Similar output is
obtained from galvanic pairs in the second group, of which the best
studied is a zinc anode coupled with a palladium or platinum-black
cathode; molecular oxygen combines with water at the cathode producing OH- and H+ ions. Unfortunately, galvanic sources provoke a
significant host reaction, including formation of layers of necrotic
debris, free neutrophils, granulation tissue and complete fibrous
connective tissue encapsulation of long-term implants.590,3512
The biofuel cell590,3526,3527 relies upon redox reactions in which
neither anode nor cathode is consumed but merely act as catalysts,
potentially a great advantage in nanomedical applications. The biofuel
cell that has received the most attention for nanomedicine is the
oxyglucose cell, which could rely upon an electrochemical process
in which glucose is oxidized at the anode and molecular oxygen is
reduced at the cathode according to the following equations:
C6H12O6 + 6H2O → 6CO2 + 24H+
 + 24e-
 (anode)
{Eqn. 6.22}
6O2 + 12H2O + 24e- → 24OH-
 (cathode) {Eqn. 6.23}
Decades-old experiments using platinum black electrodes594
produced ~0.6 picoamps per micron2 of electrode surface at ~0.3
volts, with power levels of 0.2 pW/micron2 in vitro (declining over
time due to the formation and absorption of gluconic acid at the
anode), but only 0.004 pW/micron2 in vivo (when implanted in rat
or rabbit test animals) in part due to poisoning of the catalytic
anode action by proteins. Complete electrochemical oxidation of
glucose has not yet been demonstrated experimentally.1015
Controlled-permeability membranes may eliminate these problems
in nanomedical applications, but even using the aforementioned
electrodes might allow a continuous power density of 107 watts/m3
for a 10 pW oxyglucose biofuel cell using 50 micron2 of electrodes
20-nm thick. Since gluconic acid can also be oxidized at potentials
*Interestingly, when the rat was finally administered an instantly lethal intracardial injection of Nembutal the voltage required 75 minutes, after death, to fall to zero.
Basic Capabilities • Power 153
which oxidize glucose, gluconate may not be the only byproduct,
thus appropriate means of disposing of any potentially undesirable
byproducts must be included in a practical design. The addition of
specific catalysts (e.g., ruthenium) to the electrodes could be helpful.
Ethanol fuel cells, though inefficient, are already in wide
commercial use. For example, the Lion alcolmeter fuel cell alcohol
sensor2428 employs catalytic platinum electrodes (supported on a
~1 cm3 PVC matrix disk assembly impregnated with acidic electrolyte)
to produce electron flow by oxidizing ethanol to acetic acid
(producing two free electrons per alcohol molecule) at the anode
and reducing atmospheric oxygen at the cathode. Normal alcohol
working concentrations are 5-900 parts per million typically
producing up to ~10 microamps at ~5 millivolts across a 390 ohm
load, or ~50 nanowatts (power density at most ~0.1 watt/m3
). The
Lion fuel cell can also produce energy from all primary and secondary
aliphatic alcohols but not from aldehydes, ketones, ether, esters,
hydrocarbons or carboxylic acids. Other manufacturers of electrochemical fuel cells for alcohol sensing include PAS Systems, Guth
Laboratories, and Intoximeter.2429 Direct methanol fuel cells also
were under development in 1998.
The following analysis was prompted by R. Merkle’s suggestion
that an oxyglucose biofuel cell using nanoscale membranes might
achieve significantly higher power densities than indicated by past
experiments (Fig. 6.5). Consider a proton (H+
) exchange
nanomembrane consisting of a 1 nm thick diamondoid sheet
containing a number of very narrow pores each lined with atoms of
oxygen, fluorine or nitrogen, creating negatively charged channels with
high proton affinity. A channel narrow enough to admit only protons
but nothing else (~0.1 nm, excluding even helium atoms) and
surrounded by a ~3 atom thick support wall makes a ~1 nm3 pore
structure ~1 nm wide.
The power generated by each pore due to proton flow is Ppore = q N
Vp, taking q = 1.6 x 10-19 joule/proton-volt, N is the proton flow
rate in protons/sec, and Vp is the electrical potential through which
the charges fall. Experimental observations suggest Vp may reach
0.75 volt at zero load, but averages 0.3-0.6 volts at moderate loads;594
for this analysis, Vp will be taken as ~0.5 volt.1017 As for N, the
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor channel (Section 3.3.3) has a
0.65-2.2 nm inside diameter and allows 2.5 x 107 Na+ ions/sec to
pass while the channel is open, comparable to the transport rate of
artificial transmembrane peptide nanotube ion channels.1177 Taking
this flow rate as representative for N, then Ppore ~ 2 pW/pore.
Redox fuel cells using transition metal catalysts typically achieve
ncat ~ 10 catalytic events/sec/catalytic atom.1017 Oxidation of each
glucose molecule produces 24 protons, so the required catalytic rate
is N/24 ~ 106 glucose molecules/sec per pore which in turn
requires N / (24 ncat) ~ 105 metal catalyst atoms per pore. Taking Pt
atoms as representative, 105 Pt catalyst atoms have a volume of ~1500
nm3
. Including the 1 nm3 pore structure and doubling the volume
to allow for catalyst dispersal, fluid access and structural overhead
gives a 3000 nm3 single-pore catalytic unit generating 2 pW, or a
power density of ~7 x 1011 watts/m3
. (Assumed catalyst atom usage
is ~1017 atoms/watt; in 1999, the best Pt-catalyzed proton exchange
membranes required ~1018 atoms/watt.3264) The current flow of 4
picoamps through each (0.1 nm)2 pore gives a current density of 4
x 108 amps/m2
, well below the ~1010 amp/m2 maximum current
density in bulk aluminum (Section 6.4.3.1). Since ~106 glucose
molecules/sec are consumed per pore and each glucose molecule
represents 4765 zJ of free energy, then total energy available is ~4.8
pW/pore. Thus it appears the device may be 2 pW / 4.8 pW ~ 40%
efficient, though this figure is highly voltage-dependent.
J. Soreff notes that the oxyglucose biofuel cell can in theory
operate near the thermodynamic limit but may require the design
of a complex sequence of catalytic reactions, not unlike microbial
metabolism.2427 The glucose/gluconic acid source may have lower
efficiency due to incomplete oxidation but could be useful in early
systems because it requires optimization of catalytic sites for just
one reaction. On the other hand, the production of protons and
electrons from complete oxidation of glucose potentially encompasses
a lengthy biochemical chain which possibly may be implemented using sets of immobilized enzymes in the manner of mitochondrial respiration. (Mitochondrial power density is 105
-106
 watts/m3
.)781,786
There are limits to efficiency set by mismatches between redox
potentials at various steps in a respiratory chain. Given a single anodic
chamber with a common electric potential and pH, concentrations
of intermediates must be unequal to compensate for the redox
potential mismatches at various steps. If these concentrations are
too unequal, then the lowest concentration in the chain becomes
the rate-limiting intermediate for the entire process. Throughput
may be optimized by careful choice of intermediates, couplings
between reactions, and catalyst design. To oxidize glucose, in biology,
glycolysis requires ~18 enzymes, the TCA cycle ~9 enzymes, and
the pentose phosphate pathway ~9 enzymes.526 Soreff suggests that
a slightly different strategy is to have separate oxidation/proton
chambers for each stage in the catalytic pipeline, allowing intermediates to diffuse through semipermeable membranes or to be transported via molecular sorting rotors. This transfers the problem of
matching redox potentials into the electrical domain where it is more
easily resolved.
Oxyhydrogen fuel cells are another possibility, though probably
at much lower power density because hydrogen must first be produced
from the glucose fuel. This occurs naturally in the energy-generating
hydrogenosomes of the trichomonads (which use the enzymes
pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase and hydrogenase) and in the
laboratory using related enzymes (from bacteria that live near hot
underwater vents) to convert glucose into hydrogen gas and water.
In a modern 350 K oxyhydrogen fuel cell, O2 and H2 are fed into
adjacent chambers separated by a proton exchange membrane. This
membrane allows only H+ ions to flow to the O2 side, making water as
the sole waste product and establishing a net negative charge on the
H2 anode and a net positive charge on the O2 cathode, an electrical
potential of ~0.6 volts under load. This chemoelectric process is at
least ~50% efficient but typically achieves only 104
-106 watts/m3
partly due to hydrogen’s low volumetric energy density and partly
due to the crude membranes currently in commercial use. Bacterium-based biofuel cells have also been investigated.2427,3531
6.3.5 Electrical Energy Conversion Processes
Microscale electrostatic motors have been fabricated since the
late 1980s and are the subject of great current research interest.556,557
Commercially available micromachined rotors ~1 micron thick and
~100 microns in radius respond to electric field intensities >108
volts/m producing motive torques of ~10 pN-m by converting
electrical to mechanical energy, achieving power densities in the
104
-105 watts/m3 range with device lifetimes approaching 107
rotations.556
Drexler10 has described a class of submicron direct-current (DC)
electrostatic motors capable of converting between mechanical and
electrical power in either direction at a power density of ~4 x 1014
watts/m3 and an estimated efficiency >99%. (Typical macroscale
brush DC motors can have 55%-75% efficiencies, while DC
brushless motors can have efficiencies as high as 95%.)
154 Nanomedicine • Volume I
In one implementation (Fig. 6.6), electric charge is placed on
the rim of a rotor as the rim passes within a dee electrode. This
charge is then transported across a ~3 nm gap to the interior of the
opposite dee electrode, where it is removed and replaced by a charge
of opposite sign. Applying a voltage of proper sign across the dees
causes the charges in transit to apply a torque to the rotor (like a
Van de Graff generator operating in reverse), converting electrical into
mechanical power.10 As a specific example, a motor 390 nm in
diameter and 25 nm thick driven by a electric field strength of ~0.2 x
109 volts/m spins with a near-maximum rim velocity of ~1000 m/sec;
a current of ~110 nanoamperes and an electric potential of ~10
volts yields a power output of ~1.1 microwatts. Single
electron-transfer events at nanometer electrodes have been generated
and measured experimentally,878 and macroscale “Dirod” electrostatic
generators have been operated as electrostatic motors in a student
laboratory.3098
Electrical energy is also converted into mechanical energy via
the inverse piezoelectric effect.553 Piezoelectric materials such as
lead-zirconate-titanate ceramics (PZT) and natural mechanical
resonators such as quartz, when subjected to an electric field, expand or
contract depending on the orientation of the field to the piezoelectric
polarization. For example, applying 100 volts across a 750 micron
thick piezoelectric crystal causes it to deform by ~37 nm, or ~0.4
nm/volt.628There are also piezoelectric rotary actuators, with rotations
measured in ~arcsec. The feasibility of fabricating ~1 micron thick
quartz resonators by etching techniques was demonstrated decades
ago.554,555 PZT crystals are commonly used to provide movement
of samples being examined in scanning probe microscopes such as
STMs and AFMs.1093 Piezoelectric drivers used in bimorph
configurations as electromechanical transducers can produce large
mechanical displacements but relatively small forces.545 Dielectric
induction micromotors 2 microns thick and 100 microns in diameter
operating in water can be driven at 250 rev/sec at 110 volts applied
potential, converting electrical to mechanical motion and producing a
torque of 0.3 pN-m.552 Electroactive polymers (EAPs)3013,3124 and
electrostrictive polymers such as i-PMMA are being investigated
for use in “artificial muscles”;1301 an exceptionally high
electrostrictive response (~4%) has been observed in
Fig. 6.5. Schematic of oxyglucose biofuel cell with proton exchange nanomembranes.
Basic Capabilities • Power 155
electron-irradiated P(VDF-TrFE) copolymer.1594 Electromechanical
actuators based on sheets of single-walled carbon nanotubes have
been described.3238 Even bone can be made into an electret.1941
Electrostatic actuators can produce substantial mechanical forces.
One electromechanical transducer described by Drexler10 is a capacitor
with one plate fixed and connected to a signal source, with the other
plate grounded via a tunneling junction, leaving it free to move
within a small range of displacements. One design with a 1-nm
stroke length and a (12 nm)2 plate area transduces an electrical
voltage varying from 0-5 volts into a mechanical signal ranging from
0-1 nN.
A similar implementation for electromechanical transduction
involves drawing a dielectric slab of area Aslab and dielectric constant
κslab into a gap dgap between the plates of a charged capacitor at
voltage Vcap producing a field-dependent force, making a simple
mechanical dielectric drive. Applying a time-varying input voltage
of frequency νd (Hz) produces a mechanical output power of:

P A 1 1 n V 0 slab
slab
d cap
2 = 




 − 

 

 ε
κ
ν 2 d gap
{Eqn. 6.24}
For ε0 = 8.85 x 10-12 coul/N-m2 (vacuum permittivity constant),
Aslab = 100 nm2
, dgap = 2 nm, Vcap = 1 volt, κslab = 5.7 for diamond
at 300 K, and νd = 5000 Hz, Pn = 0.001 pW (power density 5 x 109
watts/m3
) and the force applied on the slab during ∆x = 1 nm
displacements is Pn / (∆x νp) ~ 1 nN.
Electrothermal energy conversion occurs during simple joule
heating, or during Seebeck effect or Peltier effect cooling, when
current passes through a bimetallic junction causing one side to get
hot and the other side cold.1034,1035
Electrochemical transduction may occur in enzymes with electric
field-sensitive conformational states,814 in voltage-gated ion channels
and nanomembranes (Section 3.3.3), and in electrolytic cells which
are chemoelectric cells (Section 6.3.4.5) operated in reverse.
Quantum-well nanostructures can be useful in fabricating
electrooptical transducers such as light-emitting diodes, electroluminescent displays and submicron-scale solid-state lasers (Section
5.3.7), and electrochromic glass with voltage-dependent transmittance
permits optical gating. Electric current sent through carbon
nanotubes causes both field emission and luminescence, about one
photon per 106 electrons—even a single nanotube makes a faint
but visible glow,1995 another case of electrooptical energy transduction.
Magnetomechanical transduction has also been employed to
remotely power centimeter-size simple legged robots using
magnetostrictive alloys as magnetic field-driven actuators in an 80
Hz 1-tesla field,564 but this approach may find only limited utility
in nanomedical systems because molecular-scale drives suffer from
the adverse scaling properties of electromagnet fields.10 Magnetic
sensors (Section 4.7.2), perhaps using molecular magnets,2598-2600
possibly could be employed as power transducers.
6.3.6 Photonic Energy Conversion Processes
Visible light falling on a blackened surface is quickly absorbed
and thermalized, the simplest example of photothermal transduction.
Such transduction is reversed in solid-state optical refrigerators,
which achieve cooling with 2% energy efficiency by flooding a
sample with infrared photons of a particular frequency that will
dampen molecular vibrations, then allowing the object to shed
energy as higher-energy fluorescent light.549
Optomechanical transduction has been demonstrated by using
low-power laser light impinging upon an optofluidic convertor to
create a pressure pulse of sufficient magnitude to operate a pneumatic
actuator in a push-pull mode,544 and an optical thermal “Brownian
ratchet” uses rotating laser light to rectify the Brownian motion of a
micron-scale plastic bead.1043 Laser-heated gas micro-actuators have
been studied,560,640 and scattering forces from optical tweezers have
been used to rotate small particles and thus may provide a means to
power nanomachines by nonmechanical means.775 Photoacoustic
transduction has been induced directly in piezoelectric indium
gallium arsenide optical signal delay devices714 and in “photostriction”
materials such as PLZT,1065 and indirectly in aqueous suspensions of
30-nm carbon particles illuminated by a pulsed laser.1056 A 200-
micron long, 600-nm thick silicon nitride beam with a 250-nm
thick coating of a glassy material made of arsenic and selenium
(chalcogenide) contracts ~1 nm when illuminated by photons
polarized along the length of the beam, and expands ~1 nm when
illuminated by photons polarized across the width of the beam.877
A ~300-micron optomechanical motor with diffraction grating
developed for the DARPA MOEMS program operates at 20 volts
and spins up to ~80 Hz.1663
Light-driven proton pumps achieve optochemical transduction
when optical photons shining on a photosensitive minicell activate
a proton pump that pumps hydrogen ions across a membrane, thus
building up a large ionic charge differential across the membrane
and chemically storing the energy of the incident light. Experimental
photoelectrolysis cells producing hydrogen and oxygen from sunlight
and water with 12.5% energy efficiency have been built.1519 Green
plants are optochemical transducers, but only 1-3% of the photonic
energy falling upon a green plant is converted to chemical energy
because most of the incident radiation is lost by reflection, transmission, or absorption by non-chloroplast pigments. Of the photons
falling directly upon active photosynthetic pigments, up to ~35% is
converted to chemical energy. Certain bacteria also employ photochemical transduction. Activation of unimolecular chemical reactions
by ambient blackbody radiation has been demonstrated,1122 and
10-100 GHz rotation in nanotube gears with dipole charges using
laser-generated alternating electric fields has been simulated
computationally.1235,1236
Photoelectric cells are a well-known technology for converting
optical to electrical energy. Commercial solar panel arrays3047
currently achieve ~105 watts/m3
, although polymer thin-film
Fig. 6.6. Submicron direct-current electrostatic motor (schematic
only, not to scale; redrawn from Drexler10).
156 Nanomedicine • Volume I
(100-200 nm) photovoltaic cells may reach ~106 watts/m3 at only
5.5% efficiency.1059 Multilayer multi-band-gap photovoltaic cells
can convert solar energy to electrical energy with efficiencies
>30%,562 and photocells and various natural photoreceptors such
as the LH2 (light harvester) molecular complex of the
Rhodopseudomonas acidophila bacterium can achieve efficiencies of
60%-90% at selected monochromatic wavelengths.3532,3533 Photoelectric dendrimeric light-harvesting molecular antennas have been
designed and synthesized.2586-2591
In the 400-700 nm optical band only, direct (cloudless noontime) sunlight energy flux is 100-400 watts/m2
. Taking the 100
watts/m2 figure and applying a 30% conversion efficiency, power
supply Pn to a nanodevice of circular cross-section of radius R is Pn
~ 100 (30%) π R2 watts in direct sunlight requiring a circular
collector spot ~0.7 microns in diameter to power a 10-pW nanorobot.
Fullerene sheets exhibit interesting opto-electronic effects: high-intensity
light shined on one side of a sheet induces an electrical voltage
potential on the other face. Progress is also being made in developing
optically pumped (optophotonic) molecular lasers.990
Low-frequency photons such as radiofrequency signals are readily
converted into electrical current using millimeter-scale loop antennas
(Section 6.4.2). For example, a 2-mm x 10-mm device implanted
subdermally with a hypodermic needle electrically stimulates muscle
using rf telemetry for control and power, in order to restore human
motor functions.563
6.3.7 Nuclear Energy Conversion Processes
The concept of using nuclear energy as a power source for
nanorobots has not been widely discussed or explored3294, in part
for sociocultural reasons. This Section describes a feasible radionuclide
power system which emits essentially no radiation into the
surrounding tissue. This is followed by a brief examination of the
challenges in harnessing fission and fusion in medical nanodevices,
and a few other somewhat speculative possibilities.
6.3.7.1 Radionuclides
The most common mode of fissile energy release occurs when
an unstable radioactive atomic nucleus emits a small particle such
as an electron (β- decay), a positron (β+ decay), a helium nucleus
(alpha decay), or a high-energy photon (gamma decay), often
transforming the nucleus into another element. Selection of an
optimum radioactive fuel is guided primarily by safety criteria:
A. Penetration Range — The mass of the α-particle is ~7000
times greater than that of an electron, so the velocity and hence the
range of α-particles in matter is considerably less than for
β-particles of equal energy. Consequently the optimum
radionuclide for medical nanorobots is predominantly an α emitter. A
simple “stopping power” approximation567 for the range of 1-10
MeV α-particles is:

R microns ~ 430 E MeV
1.3
α ( ) ρ−
absorb
0 6. {Eqn. 6.25}
where EMeV = energy per α decay (MeV) and ρabsorb = absorber density
(21,450 kg/m3 for Pt). Thus a 3 MeV α-particle (initially traveling at
~0.04c) has a range of ~2 cm in air, ~30 microns in water,
~10 microns in germanium, and ~5 microns in platinum, with a
fairly sharp cutoff and only ~1% straggling (fluctuation of particle
range around mean range). By contrast, as a crude approximation the
range of β-particles of equal energy (initially traveling at ~0.99c) is
~102
 Rα and the range of γ photons and fast neutrons of equal energy
is ~104 Rα, although “range” for these particles is imprecisely
defined because beam intensity is never truly reduced to zero but
rather decays exponentially with increased shielding. Partly because
of the heavy shielding required, 61Pm147-powered betavoltaic batteries
developed in the 1970s achieved only ~30 watts/m3
,
603 while
94Pu238-powered thermoelectric batteries produced up to ~58 watts/
m3
;
631 over 2300 nuclear-powered cardiac pacemakers were implanted
without mishap during 1970-76,633 but new implantations apparently
ceased in 1983.3492
The absorption of α-particles in matter results almost
entirely from collisions with electrons, or ionization reactions, which
create 105
-106 ion pairs per ~MeV α-particle (depending upon
absorber material), slowing the particle almost to a halt. For some
light-nucleus absorbers, there may also be an extremely small
contribution from direct interactions with the nucleus.
Alpha-particles with energies as low as 4.8 MeV (e.g., from 88Ra226)
were observed to transmute atoms of all elements from 5B up to 19K
(except for 6C and 8O) with the emission of protons.1007 Low-energy
α-particles can also occasionally transmute light-atom nuclei to
produce neutrons—one of the strongest such reactions involves 4.6
MeV α-particles emanating from 86Rn222 striking a 4Be9 absorber,
wherein one α-particle out of every 5000 enters the beryllium
nucleus and sends out a neutron (with a much longer range than an
α-particle of equal energy), a 0.02% reaction probability.1008 Thus
the worst case (e.g., shield materials are poorly chosen) is one
low-energy proton or neutron emitted per 109 - 1010 ion pairs
generated (e.g., ~1 every 2000 sec at an α-particle current of 1
picoamp), though most such secondary reactions have far lower
probabilities.
However, naturally emitted α-particles generally cannot
penetrate the nuclei of heavier elements and therefore generally cannot
create significant secondary radiation in heavy-nucleus absorbers,
hence shielding should be made from heavier elements. To first
order, overcoming Coulomb repulsion and entering the nucleus
requires an α-particle energy Erepulse > 2 Z e2 / 4 π ε0 rnucl (joules),1005
where Z is atomic number (nuclear charge number), e = 1.60 x 10-19
coul (elementary charge), ε0 = 8.85 x 10-12 farad/m (permittivity
constant), and Rutherford’s classical formula for nuclear radius rnucl
~ ρnucl Z1/3,
1006 where ρnucl ~ 1.6 x 10-15 m.* Thus for example,
using a 78Pt absorber, rnucl ~ 7 x 10-15 m and Erepulse > 33 MeV; with
a 32Ge absorber, rnucl ~ 5 x 10-15 m and Erepulse > 18 MeV. In either
case, the 2-4 MeV low-energy natural-emission alpha particles likely
to be employed in nanomedical nucleoelectric systems (Table 6.5)
have energies about an order of magnitude smaller than Erepulse.
B. Gamma Rays — Gamma rays are toxic to most biomaterials,
have the greatest penetrating power, dissipate useful fissile energy,
and may foster erosion of shielding due to electron-positron pair
creation. Thus the ideal medical nanorobot radionuclide fuel emits
no γ-rays during disintegration.
C. Decay Chain — Radioactive elements typically decay to
progressively lighter elements which may also be radioactive. Ideally,
each of the daughter products of the ideal radionuclide should meet
the above criteria for the entire decay chain down to stable nuclei.
Since each decay event produces a fixed amount of energy, power
density Prad of a radionuclide of density ρ is proportional to the
number of disintegrations per second, or inversely proportional to
half-life, as:
*Some exotic artificial nuclei such as Li11 do not obey the classical Z1/3 rule.1128
Basic Capabilities • Power 157

P k E
AW t (watts/m ) rad
rad MeV
1/2
3 = ρ {Eqn. 6.26}
where AW = atomic weight (gm/mole), t1/2 = half-life (sec), and krad
= 109 ln(2) NA EeV where NA = 6.023 x 1023 atoms/mole (Avogadro’s
number) and EeV = 160 zJ/eV. To be useful in medical nanorobots,
t1/2 should be at least 10 days (~106
 sec) or longer for convenience
of storage and use—ideally, commensurate with the anticipated
mission duration to preclude the need for potentially hazardous
refueling operations in vivo. Table 6.5 gives power densities Prad for
several candidates and data for a few other benchmark radionuclides.763,764
Among all gamma-free alpha-only emitters with t1/2 > 106 sec,
the highest volumetric power density is available using Gd148
(gadolinium) which α-decays directly to Sm144 (samarium), a stable
rare-earth isotope. A solid sphere of pure Gd148 (~7900 kg/m3
) of
radius r = 95 microns surrounded by a 5-micron thick platinum shield
(total device radius R = 100 microns) and a thin polished silver
coating of emissivity er = 0.02 suspended in vacuo would
initially maintain a constant temperature T2 (far from a surface held
at T1 = 310 K) of:

T T P r
3 e R 2 1 ~ 600K 4 rad
3
r
2
1/4
= + 




 σ
{Eqn. 6.27}
with a 75-year half-life, initially generating 17 microwatts of thermal
power which can be converted to 8 microwatts of mechanical power
by a Stirling engine operating at ~50% efficiency. (Smaller spheres
of Gd148 run cooler.) While probably too large for most individual
nanorobot designs, such spheres could be an ideal long-term energy
source for a swallowable or implantable “power pill” (Chapter 26)
or dedicated energy organ (Section 6.4.4). A ~0.2 kg block of pure
Gd148 (~1 inch3
) initially yields ~120 watts, sufficient in theory to
meet the complete basal power needs of an entire human body for ~1
century (given suitable nucleochemical energy conversion and load buffering mechanisms, and a sufficiently well-divided structure). Nuclear
powered energy organs are discussed further in Section 6.4.4.
A 1 micron3 block of radioactive gadolinium yields a useful ~3
pW of thermal power. However, a minimum of 5 microns of Pt
shielding is still required, so the minimum possible diameter of a
zero-emissions Gd148-powered nanorobot is ~11 microns,* reducing
power density to ~104 watts/m3
.** The low energy density would
produce a surface temperature of 320 K, allowing only ~3% thermal
conversion efficiency.** Higher efficiencies may be achieved using
semiconductor junction α-particle nucleoelectric transducers that
convert the linear ionization trail of electron-hole pairs directly into
electrical current in ~10-9 sec (Fig. 6.7). Such ionization in silicon
and germanium is well-studied: the average energy loss per ion pair
produced by a passing α-particle is 3.6 eV (580 zJ) for Si, 3.0 eV
(480 zJ) for Ge;567 an 11-micron thick Ge wall is required to stop the
3.18 MeV α-particles. A (1 micron)3 cube of Gd148 produces ~5
α-particles/sec, yielding an output current of ~1 picoampere at ~3
volts (e.g., ~3 pW). Unlike most nanomachinery for which a
Table 6.5 Volumetric Radioactive Power Density of Various Radionuclides763
Alpha Beta Gamma Volumetric
Half-Life Emissions Emissions Emissions Other Power Density
Radionuclide (sec) (MeV) (MeV) (MeV) Emissions (watts/m3)
58Ce142 1.6 x 1023 1.50 --- --- --- 3.0 x 10-8
92U235 2.2 x 1016 4.35 --- 0.074-0.385 SF 1.1
83Bi210m 8.2 x 1013 4.90 --- --- --- 1.9 x 102
64Gd150 9.4 x 1012 2.70 --- --- --- 1.0 x 103
6C14 1.8 x 1011 --- 0.156 --- --- 1.5 x 104
88Ra226 5.1 x 1010 4.77 --- 0.187-0.64 --- 1.4 x 105
64Gd148 2.4 x 109 3.18 --- --- --- 4.8 x 106
61Pm147 8.3 x 107 --- 0.225 --- --- 8.7 x 106
94Pu238 2.8 x 109 5.48 --- 0.0436-0.875 SF 1.1 x 107
96Cm244 5.5 x 108 5.79 --- 0.043-0.15 SF 2.0 x 107
98Cf250 3.1 x 108 6.02 --- 0.043 SF 3.6 x 107
16S35 7.5 x 106 --- 0.167 --- --- 8.8 x 107
98Cf252 8.0 x 107 6.11 --- 0.043-0.10 SF 1.4 x 108
98Cf248 3.0 x 107 6.23 --- 0.045 SF 3.9 x 108
96Cm242 1.4 x 107 6.10 --- 0.04409 SF 8.4 x 108
84Po210 1.2 x 107 5.30 --- 0.79 --- 1.3 x 109
96Cm240 2.3 x 106 6.26 --- --- SF 5.3 x 109
15P32 1.2 x 106 --- 1.71 --- --- 6.5 x 109
98Cf244 1.5 x 103 7.17 --- --- SF 9.2 x 1012
84Po212 3.0 x 10-7 8.78 --- --- --- 8.6 x 1022
SF = Spontaneous Fission
*The orbit radius rorbit of an α-particle of mass m = 6.68 x 10-27 kg, charge q = 2 x (1.6 x 10-19) coul and energy EMeV = 3.18 MeV circling in a uniform magnetic field
B = 1 tesla in vacuo is rorbit = (ka EMeV m / q2
 B2
)1/2 = 0.3 meter (ka = 3.2 x 10-13), about as wide as a human body, so more compact in vivo nanocyclotronic storage of α-particle
emissions to allow a controlled energy release is not feasible.
**Plutonium dioxide radioactive thermal generator (RTG) systems developed by NASA and DOE in the 1980s produced thermal power of ~105 watts/m3 and electrical power
of ~104 watts/m3
, a ~10% conversion efficiency. Conventional large nuclear power plants average ~32% conversion efficiency, according to U.S. Federal Energy Information
Agency statistics.
158 Nanomedicine • Volume I
single-point failure would ordinarily be fatal to machine function10
(Chapter 13), the design presented here should be extremely resistant
to such failures. The C-C bond energy is also ~3.4 eV, so direct
nucleochemical transduction of α-particle energy into chemical form
is theoretically possible — conversion of carbonaceous material to
diamond crystal by fission fragment irradiation has been
reported.1029
Are Gd148-powered nanorobots safe? Yes, if their shielding
remains intact. There are no β or γ emissions, and given adequate
shielding, no α-particles can escape. Significant shield erosion is
unlikely because:
1. almost all α-particle interactions are with orbital electrons, not
nuclei, of shield atoms;
2. α-particle emission rates are low (e.g., ~5/sec);
3. radioactive impurities need not be present in nanomanufactured
structures; and
4. background radiation is not a major reliability issue for
homogeneous components larger than ~10 nm (Chapter 13).10
In the extremely unlikely event of complete shield removal,
maximum range of α-particles in water or soft tissues is ~30
microns or ~one cell width. The radiation from the radioactive cores
of ~1 billion Gd148-powered nanorobots, if all their shielding was
destroyed, would deliver a ~500 rad lifetime lethal radiation dose in
~1 day; an unshielded ~0.2 kg block of Gd148 (~100 watt output)
delivers an LD50 (see below) dose in ~10 seconds. Gd148 is a
non-fissionable material, hence fissile chain reactions or explosions
are not possible. Indeed, gadolinium has the highest neutron
absorption cross-section of any known element and is more useful
in control rods or as a nuclear shield. As for chemical toxicity in the
event of a breach, ionic Gd is rapidly converted to colloidal hydroxide
and phosphates in the blood, which is then rapidly taken up by the
reticuloendothelial system mostly in the liver and spleen;598 half-time
in the lung is ~2 hours.600 In macrophages, the rare earths localize
in lysosomes as insoluble phosphates.599 Rare earths such as Gd or
Sm are not particularly toxic—LD50 is typically 0.5-5 grams/kg body
weight,601 or 35-350 gm for a 70 kg human adult. No chemical
carcinogenicity or mutagenicity has been found.601 In 1998, Gd148
could be purchased from Los Alamos National Laboratory for $0.50/
micron3
.
2315 This cost must be significantly reduced for
Gd148-powered nanorobots to become economically feasible.
If greater operating power densities are required,
radionuclide-powered nanorobots with power cores that are hotter
or are smaller than ~1 micron3 (but with shielded diameters still
>11 microns) will require switching to a less-safe material of higher
energy density, such as Po210, which decays to stable Pb206 with a
5-month half life. For example, a Po210 spherical power core of
radius 100 nm has a surface temperature of ~600 K and produces
~6 pW which may be tapped via heat engine as described earlier.
However, such a heat source also produces one 0.79 MeV gamma
photon every ~104
 sec; unshielded, ~300 such photons represent a
lethal dose (~500 rad or ~5 joules/kg soft tissue) to a single
mammalian cell, giving a dose rate of ~10 millirad/hour vs.
~5 millirad/hour for the early implantable Pu238 nuclear thermoelectric batteries.724 Thus the lifetime exposure* of any cell visited
by Po210-powered nanorobots is restricted for safety to at most ~1
nanorobot-month, which may be acceptable in many short-duration
applications. No such restriction would apply to the Gd148 device,
discussed earlier.
Larger amounts of energy (up to ~0.1% of rest mass) may be
released by the fission of a heavy atomic nucleus into nuclei of two
lighter elements of roughly equal mass, followed by any of ~50
distinct decay chains down to stable nuclei for the unstable fission
fragments, as for example:
U235 → mixed fission products + 200 MeV (3.2 x 1010 zJ)
{Eqn. 6.28}
which achieves ~0.091% mass conversion to energy. During fission,
typically one neutron is absorbed by a nucleus but 1-3 neutrons are
emitted, making possible a chain reaction. In effect, neutrons act as
fission catalysts. Nuclear species which may support a
net-energy-producing fissile chain reaction include U232, U233, U235
(critical mass ~ 3.6 kg), Pu239, Am241 and Am242 (thermal or fast neutrons) and Th232, Pa231 and U238 (fast neutrons only). From a Fig. 6.7. Schematic of semiconductor-junction nucleoelectric
transducer.
*The rad is the standard unit of absorbed dose, defined as 1 rad = 0.01 joule/kg. LD50 is the absorbed dose that produces lethality in 50% of all exposures, typically 400-500
rads for human tissue. The traditional LD50 for a 70-kg human body (~500 rads) thus requires the absorption of ~350 joules. For a single ~10 nanogram human liver cell,
assuming the traditional LD50 (~500 rads) would require the absorption of ~50 pJ of ionizing radiation energy. To rigorously assess the safety of radiation emitted from
nanorobots, the effects of the particular radiation on specific cells or organs must be evaluated.3075-3078 There are large differences in organ sensitivity, ion-mass sensitivity,
and environmental sensitivities such as variations in iron, Vitamin C, or melatonin levels. Lethality of cells is at one end of a continuum which also includes lower-dose effects
(e.g., cancer transformation rates) that disturb the cell’s function without killing it, thus harming the body the cell is serving. The availability of cellular repair devices vastly
increases both LD50 and traditional “lifetime exposure” radiation limits that may be tolerated by humans (Chapter 24). Substantial genomic, biotechnological, and
nanotechnological engineering to increase the radiation tolerance of cells (Chapter 24) also could help to minimize cancer risks and birth defects, and to allow human beings
to more easily live and work in space. Nevertheless, a fundamental nanomedical design principle is to avoid using devices whose normal behavior causes additional damage
to the body (Chapter 11).
Basic Capabilities • Power 159
nanomedical perspective, the minimum size of a neutron-mediated
fission power plant is restricted primarily by the shielding requirement
for γ-rays totalling ~5 MeV per reaction, which apparently precludes
microscale in vivo medical fission reactors. For instance, ~8 cm of
solid Pt shielding (e.g., a cantaloupe-sized ball, weighing ~46 kg)
only reduces γ-ray intensity to 1% of its incident value. High γ
fluxes are also very damaging to nanomachinery.
6.3.7.2 Nuclear Fusion
Still larger energies (up to ~1% of rest mass) are available from
nuclear reactions in which light nuclei fuse to form heavier nuclei,
although it appears that conventional nuclear fusion is unlikely to
be practical for in vivo nanomedical applications. The
deuterium-tritium (D-T) fusion reaction requires the lowest
temperature to ignite—141 million K, which is 12.1 KeV or
1.94 x 10-15 joules per nuclei—and achieves 0.38% mass conversion
to energy:

D T He 3.5 MeV n 14.1 MeV 2 3
12.1 KeV
4 +  →  ( ) + ( )
{Eqn. 6.29}
A D-T atom pair has volume ~10-3 nm3
; maximum diamondoid
piston (controlled) compression at 105 atm puts 10-20 joules into
this volume, too low by a factor of ~106
. However, target
bombardment may allow micron-scale fusion ignition. Although
magnetic cyclotronic confinement of 12.1 KeV particles at B = 1
tesla requires a storage ring of radius rorbit ~ 3 cm (Section 6.3.7.1),
the length of a linear particle accelerator scales as ~K.E./qE
(Section 4.7.4) so a 109 volt/m electric field requires only ~12 microns
to accelerate an ionized triton or deuteron to the ignition temperature.
The first major problem with the D-T reaction from a
nanomedical standpoint is the dangerously high flux of 14.1 MeV
fast neutrons, which in human tissue interact with hydrogen to
produce deuterium plus a 2.2 MeV γ-ray, and with nitrogen to produce radioactive C14 plus a 0.6 MeV proton. Neutrons, like γ-rays,
are highly penetrating radiation, so using the D-T
reaction will require much thicker shielding (see below). One
alternative is to switch to a cleaner-burning (aneutronic fusion) but
slightly hotter process such as the classical Cockcroft-Walton reaction
involving proton bombardment of lithium which achieves 0.23%
mass conversion to energy:

Li p 2He 16.73 MeV 7
125 1600 KeV
4 +  →  + − {Eqn. 6.30}
(A competing neutron-emitting reaction (Li7 + p → Be7 + n) occurs
only at incident proton energies >1.6 MeV, and radiative absorption of
the proton, producing a radiated γ-ray, occurs as a sharp
resonance absorption at a proton bombardment energy of 440
KeV.2463) A ~109
 volt/m linear accelerator ~125 microns in length
can produce 125 KeV protons, and from Eqn. 6.25 a platinum shield
~18 microns thick absorbs ~100% of the 8.36 MeV α-particles
produced, thermalizing the energy.
The second major problem with micron-scale fusion is its low
reaction cross-section. Cross-section is a measure of the probability
that a given nuclear reaction will take place. If I0 incident protons/
sec provoke Ir reactions/sec in a sample of thickness x with nuclear
cross-section σn barns (1 barn = 10-24 cm2
) and target density Ntarget
(atoms/cm3
) = ρ NA / AW, then

I
I 1 e r
0
N x target n = − − σ {Eqn. 6.31}
To get more energy out of the fusion reaction than is put into
the protons (e.g., energy breakeven), the reaction probability (Ir/I0)
> (125 KeV / 16.73 MeV) ~ 0.7%. For Li7
, AW = 7 and ρ = 0.534
gm/cm3 so Ntarget = 4.6 x 1022 atoms/cm3
; with σn ~ 0.01-0.001
barns for the reaction over this energy range,662 then to achieve
energy breakeven the lithium target must be at least x > 16-160 cm
thick. However, the range of 125 KeV protons in lithium is only
~0.0003 cm,567 so energy breakeven cannot be achieved. As for the
D-T reaction, one calculation for laser compression of D-T fuel
pellets indicated that the minimum pellet diameter to achieve
(explosive) ignition is ~4.2 mm and requires a total incident energy
of 11.2 megajoules602 in a ~nanosecond pulse. Smaller pellets could
not achieve energy breakeven.* It is estimated that the minimum
dimension of a high-temperature fusion reactor may be on the order of
centimeters.1023 But even if a ~1011 joule/m3 energy density can be
obtained with diamondoid materials allowing the reactor core to be
as small as (5 cm)3
, a 2.3-cm thick Pt shield for the 14.1 MeV
neutrons only reduces the incident intensity by half. Thus the smallest
medically safe D-T fusion reactor is probably at least ~1 meter in
diameter (e.g., to reduce incident fast neutron intensity by ~10-6
upon exit).
D-D fusion produces either neutrons or radioactive tritium
effluent, only 3-4 MeV per reaction, and achieves only ~0.1% mass
conversion to energy. The D-He3 reaction produces 0.39% mass
conversion with H and He4 effluent (both particles charged, hence
field-manipulable), but is harder to ignite (~60 KeV). There are
always unavoidable neutron-producing reactions due to D-D reactions
in the primary fuel and D-T reactions between the primary deuterium
and the secondary tritium, although Petrie2462 noted that neutron
reactions can be less than ~5% of the D-He3 reactions. He3 is also
very rare on Earth. The H-B11 reaction may produce C12 and is
probably exoergic, but γ-rays are emitted.1006,3534
6.3.7.3 Exothermal Nuclear Catalysis
One solution to low nuclear reaction probability and a poor energy
balance is to employ a nuclear catalyst. A number of possibilities
have been investigated, as described below.
In principle, the two deuterons in a deuterium molecule can
spontaneously fuse to form tritium + proton or He3 + neutron,
liberating 4 Mev of energy. The two electrons in the D2 molecule
act as a catalyst, holding the deuterons together so they can react.
According to quantum mechanics, the deuterons can tunnel toward
each other through the classically forbidden region of repulsion until
they get so close (~2 x 10-15 m) that the strong force dominates and
fusion occurs.605
In practice the rate of this reaction is very small, ~10-74 molecule-1
sec-1.
609 But if an electron of mass Me is replaced by a heavier
negatively charged particle such as a muon (Mmuon ~ 207 Me), forming
a muonic molecule, the required tunneling distance shortens by the
ratio of the masses—in this case, from 5 x 10-11 m to 2 x 10-13 m,
making penetration of the barrier much more likely and dramatically
raising the reaction rate to ~106
 molecule-1 sec-1.
607
Muon catalysis of the proton-deuteron reaction, initially proposed
theoretically by Frank in 1947,606 was first observed experimentally
in 1957 by Alvarez.604 It has since been shown to be an effective
means of rapidly inducing fusion reactions in low-temperature
*More recent hydrodynamic simulations of a 10-micron D2O-vapor-doped D2 gas bubble compressed to 0.38 micron in 0.5 microsec using a 5-atm triangular spike superimposed
on a 1-atm 27.6 KHz oscillating driving pressure produces a 2.2 KeV peak central temperature ~11 picosec before the bubble reaches minimum radius, which should be hot
enough to generate at least a small number of thermonuclear D-D fusion reactions in the bubble.933
160 Nanomedicine • Volume I
(<1200 K) mixtures of hydrogen isotopes, with D-T reaction rates
of ~109
 sec-1.
608,610,611 The field has had its own technical journal,
Muon Catalyzed Fusion, since 1987, and there are excellent recent
review articles.663,664 But muon catalysis has long been considered
impractical for large-scale fusion reactors because the muon is relatively
short-lived (2 microsec) and is quickly captured by a helium nucleus
formed in a fusion reaction.*605 Typically the number of fusions
catalyzed by a muon during its lifetime is ~150 in liquid D2/T2, but
~1000 are needed to achieve energy breakeven given the energy cost
of artificial muon production.664 More than 70% of the cosmic ray
flux at Earth’s surface consists of positive and negative muons, but
the cosmic-ray induced fusion rate is still impractically low, ~10-26
watts/micron3
 in liquid deuterium targets.665
It has also been demonstrated experimentally that various changes
in chemical composition, pressure, or electric fields can also act as
nuclear catalysts, increasing the rates of nuclear transformations:
A. Chemical Composition — The rate of electron capture for Be7
is 0.08% greater in BeF2 than in metallic Be.390
B. Mechanical Pressure — The electron capture (EC) decay rates
of Tc99 and Ba131 are measurably altered at a pressure of 100,000
atm.612 At 230,000 atm there is a 0.35% increase in the electron
density at the nucleus of the free Be atom; the observed increase in
the EC decay constant of Be7 oxide with pressure is so linear that it
may be used as a method of pressure measurement in diamond
anvil experiments in which optical access is impossible.612 It has
been suggested that very high pressures could induce
fusion.609,933 One experiment in which Pd and Ti immersed in D2O
were bombarded with intense ultrasound apparently
produced above-background levels of He4
, an expected endproduct
of D-D fusion processes.1289
C. Fracture Deformations — Fracto-fusion621 experiments have
detected neutron emission when a crystal of lithium deuteride or
heavy ice is mechanically fractured, believed to be the
consequence of deuteron acceleration by >10 KeV electric fields
generated by a propagating crack in the crystal, consistent with D-D
fusion.614,620,1009 Heating, cooling, or fracturing metal specimens
exposed to high-pressure D2 (e.g., deuterated titanium) frequently
produces statistically significant bursts of neutrons and emission of
charged particles, rf signals and photons. It is proposed that crack
growth results in charge separation on the newly formed crack surfaces,
accelerating D+ ions in the electric field across the crack tip to energies
>10 KeV sufficient to significantly raise the D-D fusion probability.618
Neutrons are reportedly generated when fragments of titanium are
crushed with steel balls in a bath of heavy water.619 It has also been
speculated that the core of the spherical acoustic shock wave generated
during sonoluminescence, if it remains stable to a 10-nm radius,
might reach temperatures appropriate to fusion 106
 K.716,933
D. Electric Fields — Claytor et al at Los Alamos National Laboratory passed a current of 2.5 amperes at 2000 volts through 200-micron
diameter palladium wires in a glow discharge tube of D2 gas at 0.3
atm for ~100 hours apparently producing ~10 nanocuries of tritium,
with great care being taken to eliminate possible sources of contamination.613 Deuterium-saturated LiTaO3 crystals in a 75 KV/cm AC
field exhibit elevated neutron emission attributed to D-D fusion.2344
Wires of LiD exploded by high current pulses also emit fusion
neutrons.622
E. Metallic Deuterides — Most controversial is the speculative
possibility of metallic deuteride catalyzed fusion at temperatures
between 300 K–1100 K,615-617,624,740,3438 first reported (then later
partially retracted!) in the years 1926-27.666 Positive results are
reported for a comprehensive series of experiments conducted
at SRI International for the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI)
during 1989-94,676,677 and for another comprehensive series of
experiments conducted by the U.S. Naval Air Warfare Center at
China Lake during 1989-96,1275 and U.S. patents have been issued
for such devices (e.g., Patterson and Cravens, U.S. #5,607,563 on 4
March 1997). In another class of experiments [Edmund Storms,
personal communication, 1996], a hydrogenophilic metal such as
palladium is loaded with deuterium at effective pressures ~10-100
atm, giving molecular loadings of D/Pd = 85%-95%. Palladium
deuteride normally exists either as Pd2D or PdD, but it is believed
that the highest loadings1610-1612 may give rise to significant concentrations of PdDx (x=1-2), asserted to be the “nuclear active phase.”
Superstoichiometric palladium hydride (x = 1.33) at ~50,000 atm has
been observed experimentally in x-ray diffraction studies,667 although
preliminary molecular simulation studies of deuterium-entrained metal
lattices have given pessimistic results.668
Upon applying a current of ~1 nanoampere/micron2 at ~1-10
volts to a superstoichiometric metallic deuteride, significant heat
energy in excess of the electrical input is said to be developed as the
deuterium is consumed, on the order of 106
-109 watts/m3
. He4 is
claimed to be produced at the expected rate of ~1011 He4 atoms/
sec-watt,1275 with neutrons, tritons (tritium nuclei), γ-rays and X-rays
missing or detected in amounts far too small to account for the
excess energy, which is asserted to be evidence of a catalyzed D-D
aneutronic process at work. If the results of these experiments were
confirmed, it might become possible to use diamondoid pistons to maintain continuously high deuterium loadings in an active catalytic crystal
and thus to develop 1-1000 pW of aneutronic thermal energy in a
precisely nanomanufactured porous 1 micron3 metal-deuteride
reactor with He4
 (23.85 MeV) as the principal (and benign) effluent,
achieving storage densities >1016 joules/m3 which would allow a
completely self-contained >10 year fuel supply to be carried aboard
a 10 pW nanorobot in a ~1 micron3
 fuel tank.
6.4 Power Transmission
Power may be stored in, and converted among, many different
forms, but the ultimate energy resource must be received from some
external source by medical nanodevices (e.g., chemical energy from
ingested food). The following discussion concentrates on acoustic
(Section 6.4.1), electromagnetic (Section 6.4.2), and tethered
(Section 6.4.3) power transmission, and closes with a brief description
of dedicated energy organs (Section 6.4.4).
6.4.1 Acoustic Power Transmission
Acoustically powered medical nanorobots may derive their energy
either from sources indigenous to the human body (Section 6.3.3
and Table 6.3) or from artificial sources placed in or on the human
body. Large arrays of microscale acoustic radiators could create
focused coherent sonic beams. Such artificial sources are likely to
involve ultrasonic frequencies designed to minimize any aural
*In 1975 an even heavier negatively-charged lepton was discovered, the tauon. The internuclear tunneling distance for a hypothetical tauonic deuterium molecule (Mtauon ~
3500 Me) is only ~10-14 m, which should catalyze fusion almost instantaneously. Unfortunately the tauon is shorter-lived than the muon (~10-11 sec), a lifetime much closer
to the typical nuclear reaction time range of 10-13–10-21 sec.
Basic Capabilities • Power 161
discomfort to the user. According to the official statement issued by
the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM) in
1978,626 no significant biological effects have been reliably observed
in mammalian tissues exposed in vivo to unfocused ~MHz ultrasound with intensities of 1000 watts/m2 or less, although the onset
of continuous-wave ultrasound-induced lysis of human erythrocytes
has occasionally been detected experimentally at intensities as low
as 60 watts/m2 at 1.6 MHz when micron-size gas bubbles are also
present.3043 There are also no significant biological effects observed
after continuous exposures exceeding 1 second in duration for total
energy transfers of 500 kilojoule/m2 or less. (The comparable hazard
threshold for UV excimer laser light is ~0.5 kilojoule/m2
.
645)
Exposures of any duration >500 kilowatts/m2 may cause cavitation
and other harmful effects in biological tissue (see below). On the
basis of additional experimental results, the AIUM in 1988 slightly
revised its statement627 to allow intensities as high as 10,000 watts/m2
for exposures to highly focused sound beams, which is about the
highest that human volunteers can tolerate.505 (In 1985 the FDA
allowed ultrasound intensities up to 7300 watts/m2 for cardiac use,
15,000 watts/m2 for peripheral vessels, and 1800 watts/m2 for fetal,
abdominal, intraoperative, pediatric, cephalic, and small-organ
(breast, thyroid, testes) imaging.628) Figure 6.8 summarizes current
standards in simplified graphical form.
Deleterious biological effects may occur in at least five ways:
1. Transient Cavitation — Transient bubbles which implode
produce temperature increases of ~103 K and pressure spikes of
~103 atm localized in regions of a few microns in radius. Normal or
transient cavitation requires ~105 watts/m2 (~5.4 atm) at 30 KHz
or ~106 watts/m2 (~17 atm) at 1 MHz to form in water.628 Intensities
less than ~104 watts/m2 will not produce transient cavitation in any
tissue.629
2. Stable Cavitation — Small pre-existing bubbles surrounded
by water resonate in synchrony with the acoustic field, with the
liquid acting as the oscillating mass and the gas serving as the compliant component. For an air bubble of radius rbubble (meters) in
water, resonant frequency νres ~ 0.3 / rbubble (Hz) for hard-shell-less
bubbles up to ~1 MHz;647 thus a 6-micron bubble resonates at ~600
KHz. Resonating bubbles have been reported in therapeutic beams
at power intensities as low as 6800 watts/m2
 at 750 KHz.628
3. Heating — Dissipation of vibrational energy can initially heat
tissues ~1 K/minute if applied at, say, 50,000 watts/m2 at 3 MHz,
in the hazard zone of Figure 6.8. Continuous exposure to 2000-6000
watts/m2 at 0.1-10 MHz raises human tissue temperature by 1 K at
equilibrium, which is considered safe.629 Ultrasound intensities of
~2 x 107 watts/m2 at the point of action are used to cauterize liver
tissue after surgery.158
4. Acoustic Torque and Fluid Streaming — Physical fluid motions
are driven by ultrasonic radiation pressure, typically ~0.001 N/watt,
or ~1 pN/micron2 at 1000 watts/m2
. Forces of this magnitude or
larger can cause damaging shear stresses in molecules or cells and
may give rise to small voltages in bone via the piezoelectric effect.628
5. Shock Wave Formation — Shock waves most easily form in
liquids having low attenuation such as urine in the bladder or
amniotic fluid. A 3-MHz 10-atm pulse shows a shock waveform
after passing through 5 cm of water.628
Consider a micron-scale nanorobot located somewhere deep
within the human body that wishes to receive acoustic power from
an artificial external source. A “safe” Ipower = 1000 watt/m2 source
pressed against the skin suffers three major reductions in intensity
before its emanations reach the nanorobot. First, the power transferred
to the entire body is reduced by a geometrical power reduction factor
(PRF) which may be approximated as the ratio of the area of the
transmitter in contact with the skin to the largest planar section
through the torso, ~1500 cm2
. Second, after conversion of incident
power intensity to pressure amplitude using Eqn. 4.53, transmitted
amplitude is reduced by reflection losses (Eqn. 4.54), which may
range from a 90% loss for a poorly-coupled source to just 10% loss
for a well-coupled transmitter. Third, the pressure amplitude of the
power signal is attenuated by absorption, reflection, and scattering
as it passes through human tissue, as described by Eqn. 4.52.
Thus attenuated, the power signal finally reaches the nanorobot
and is converted to mechanical power using a piston-type transducer as
described by Eqn. 6.13. Combining all the above factors gives
received power Pn which is a cubic and exponential function of
acoustic frequency νp and an exponential function of acoustic path
length Xpath, which factors interact to produce an optimum acoustic
power transmission frequency for various path lengths as shown in
Figure 6.9. Pn is given by Eqn. 6.13, with ∆V = L3
 and ∆P = (1 – Rloss)
(2 ρ vsound Ipower PRF)1/2 e(-αtiss νp Xpath)
, where ρ = 993.4 kg/m3
,
vsound = 1500 m/sec in water at 310 K (Eqn. 4.53), and Rloss = 1
– Atransmit/Aincident from Eqn. 4.54.
In operating table scenarios wherein acoustic transmissions from
the table may reach all parts of the body within a very short path
length (~10-30 cm) and the 1000 watt/m2 transmitter may be
well-coupled to ~40% of the patient’s body surface giving PRF
>1.00(100%), the power available to a ~0.3 micron3 nanorobot
receiver may be quite large, on the order of ~104 pW or greater even
at sub-MHz frequencies at the 1000 watts/m2 incidence level. Similar
power levels might also be achieved using carefully-designed
permanently-implanted acoustic radiator organs which are themselves
powered by some external source such as induced emf, backpack
batteries or even tethered household electrical current.
The greatest engineering challenge arises when whole-body
acoustic power is to be supplied by some small extradermal source
Fig. 6.8. Safety zone for human exposure to ultrasound.
162 Nanomedicine • Volume I
the size of a wristwatch, wallet, belt buckle, ankle bracelet,
headband*, or amulet worn around the neck. The power curves in
Figure 6.9 assume a wristwatch-band-sized radiator (~30 cm2
) with
a PRF of 2% and a single 0.3 micron3 receiver on the nanorobot.
For a conservative design the longest acoustic path length in the
human body (~200 cm) would govern the calculation, giving an
optimum acoustic power transmission frequency of ~60 KHz,
providing >40 pW in this configuration for a path entirely through
soft tissue (αtiss ~ 8.3 x 10-6 sec/m; Table 4.2). Thus a 10-pW
nanorobot may be powered on just a ~25% duty cycle, allowing plenty
of “quiet time” for acoustic communications, sensing, and navigational
activities. A 1000 watt/m2
 transmitter with 30 cm2
 of contact area
provides 3 watts of acoustic power, enough to supply ~1011 10-pW
nanorobots; ~1013 10-pW nanorobots could be supported in the operating table scenario. For comparison, typical average power outputs of medical ultrasound scanners are 1-70 milliwatts at 0.5-20
MHz.506,628
As a practical matter, acoustic power transmission may require
slightly higher frequencies (e.g., >110 KHz) to ensure that some
patients do not hear an annoying high-pitched noise that would be
perceived as being centered in the head. Ultrasonic hearing via bone
or body-fluid conduction has been reported at least up to 108 KHz
in humans, probably mediated by the saccule, an otolithic organ
that normally responds to acceleration and gravity.1372 Physical
discomfort,3536 intra-articular pain,3537 and a lowering of electrical
pain sensation threshold3538 due to ultrasound exposure have also
been reported in humans.
Figure 6.10 quantifies the effects of transdermal power reflection
and receiver size, neither of which significantly influence the choice
of optimum acoustic frequency although larger receivers have a
steeper frequency cutoff due to rapidly rising piston inertia losses
with frequency (Section 6.3.3).
Net power received by medical nanorobots is also strongly
influenced by the type of tissue lying across the acoustic path because
of the exponential dependence of received power on the absorption
coefficient αtiss (Fig. 6.11). Similarly, Table 6.6 shows that very highly
absorbent tissues such as bone, organs containing gas bubbles such
as the stomach or bowel, and especially the air-filled lungs efficiently
scatter and reflect large amounts of acoustic energy. Nanorobots
positioned such that these highly attenuative tissues lie between them
and the source should still receive adequate power due to internal
acoustic reflection, since 99.95% of the acoustic amplitude reaching
the skin-air interface from inside the body is reflected back into the
body (Eqn. 4.54).
Available power declines rapidly for nanodevices located inside
bone, bowel, or lung tissue, creating an “energy shadow”. Fortunately
the path lengths are sufficiently short within these regions of the
body that such losses should not become severe. For example, a 1
micron3 receiver located 200 cm from a 1000 watt/m2 transmitter
at 60 KHz with PRF = 2% and reflection loss = 10% at the skin
receives 153 pW if the acoustic path passes through soft tissues only,
46 pW if the 200 cm acoustic path includes 1 cm of bone (with a
66% reflection loss at the tissue-bone interface), or 7 pW if the
path length includes 5 cm of lung tissue (with an 80% reflection
loss at the tissue-lung interface). If two or more acoustic power
sources are simultaneously employed, destructive interference might
occur within spatially periodic regions of smallest width on the
order of one wavelength, or  vsound/νp ~ 1 cm (>>rnano) for 150
KHz waves in water at 310 K, reducing locally available power.
Energy concentration, the opposite of energy shadowing, can
also occur. If all nanorobot activity is confined to a specific organ or
other small volume, a concave focusing transducer can shape pulse
waves so that they arrive at a specific focal point within the body at
high intensity. Spheroidally shaped regions in which the speed of
sound is slower than in the surrounding medium (e.g., lower bulk
modulus, or higher density or elasticity, as for instance a fat globule
inside an organ; Eqn. 4.30 and Table 6.7) will tend to concentrate
acoustic energy towards the center by refractive focusing.928 Sound
waves also bend toward the cold side of a thermal gradient, the
low-pressure side of a pressure gradient, and the low-concentration
side of a salinity gradient. Large tubular tissue systems with areal
cross-sections >(~λ)
2 can act as acoustic waveguides; e.g., for 60
KHz waves in water, λ ~ 2.5 cm, roughly the diameter of the human
aorta.
In general, liquids within the body are only weakly absorbing,
allowing maximum transmission. Common sonolucent fluids include
urine, aqueous humor, vitreous humor, amniotic and cystic fluids.
In medical ultrasound, water immersion scanning is commonplace
(99.77% transmission at water-tissue interface; Table 6.6) and a
full bladder is a standard technique for obtaining an ultrasound
window into the uterus. Muscle tissue acoustic absorption is anisotropic; a difference of a factor of 2.5 has been reported between the
attenuation across and along its fibers.628
6.4.2 Inductive and Radiofrequency Power Transmission
Electrically-powered nanorobots may tap natural electric fields
already present in the body (Section 4.7.1) or may seek to acquire
electromagnetic power from external sources. Transdermal magnetic
induction and radiofrequency energy transfer has been employed in
radio tracking and biomedical telemetry since at least the
Fig. 6.9. Received acoustic power vs. acoustic frequency for various
path lengths in the human body.
*The maximum acoustic threshold of pain for the human ear in air is ~100 watts/m2 or ~140 dB, roughly independent of frequency within the audible range, for experienced
habituated listeners.628,1016 Animals may also take notice—maximum audible frequencies via air conduction are 20 KHz (humans), 33 KHz (monkeys), 40 KHz (dogs, pigs,
rats), 45 KHz (cats, katydids), 95 KHz (deer mice), 98 KHz (bats), and up to ~250 KHz (dolphins), while birds and fish are generally limited to <12 KHz.585
Basic Capabilities • Power 163
1920s,634,635,637,638,3510 and commercially available miniaturized
implantable transmitters are now commonplace in laboratory
work,639 but using this technique to power submillimeter devices is
a relatively recent concept.630
The biological effects of radio waves, microwaves, and infrared
rays are usually equivalent to the effects of heating, although
non-thermal rf-induced vasodilation, possibly due to Ca++ flow
manipulation, apparently has been observed in frogs.3328 Radio waves
mainly induce thermal agitation of molecules and excitation of
molecular rotations, while infrared rays excite vibrational modes
of large molecules and may release fluorescent emission as well as
heat. Both types of radiation are preferentially absorbed by unsaturated fats. In the United States the maximum permissible continuous
occupational exposure level to microwave radiation has been 50 watts/
m2 for the testes and 100 watts/m2 for the whole body—essentially
double the thermal radiance of a 100-watt (~2000 Kcal/day) ~2 m2
human body, e.g., ~50 watts/m2 across the skin, or roughly the
intensity of direct sunlight on the skin (Section 4.9.4). Figure 6.12
compares several generally accepted international occupational and
population exposure limits that have been adopted.824 Michaelson823
carried out extensive investigations and found no evidence for hazard
Fig. 6.10. Received acoustic power vs. acoustic frequency for various
receiver volumes and reflection losses.
Fig. 6.11. Received acoustic power vs. acoustic frequency for various
absorption coefficients in human tissue.
Table 6.6 Acoustic Energy Reflected and Transmitted at
Various Tissue Interfaces506,628
Tissue Energy Energy
Interface Reflected Transmitted
Kidney/Liver 0.0036% 99.9964%
Liver/Muscle 0.032% 99.968%
Muscle/Blood 0.07% 99.93%
Soft tissue/Water 0.23% 99.77%
Fat/Kidney 0.64% 99.36%
Lens/Vitreous humor 0.91% 99.09%
Fat/Liver 1.00% 99.00%
Lens/Aqueous humor 1.04% 98.96%
Fat/Muscle 1.08% 98.92%
Bone/Muscle 41.23% 58.77%
Soft tissue/Bone 43.50% 56.50%
Bone/Fat 48.91% 51.09%
Soft tissue/Lung 63.64% 36.36%
Diamond/Water 90.80% 9.20%
Muscle/Air 98.01% 1.99%
Water/Air 99.89% 0.11%
Soft tissue/Air 99.90% 0.10%
Diamond/Air 99.997% 0.0025%
Table 6.7 Velocity of Sound in Various Organs and
Biological Materials at 310 K363,506,628,730
Biological Velocity of
Material Sound (m/sec)
Air bubbles* 20
Lung (collapsed)** 320
Dry air 353
Lung (normal) 630
Silastics 950
Ethanol 1160
Fat 1470
Water 1500
Aqueous humor 1510
Castor oil 1520
Vitreous humor 1540
Soft tissue (avg) 1540
Brain 1550
Liver 1565
Whole blood 1570
Kidney 1575
Muscle 1600
Optic nerve 1615
Lens of eye 1630
Glycerol 1880
Collagen (across axis) 2940
Bone (typical) 3550
Collagen (along axis) 3640
Skull bone 4090
Enamel (tooth) 5800
Diamond ~17,300
* 45% by volume in water
** pneumonitis
164 Nanomedicine • Volume I
at 100 watts/m2
, though there is conclusive evidence of potentially
hazardous effects at levels above 1000 watts/m2
.
Single exposures to levels up to ~100 times these values may be
briefly tolerated without injury, as for example photosetting dental
fillings which require ~20 sec exposures to visible intensities of ~105
watts/m2
. Optical tweezers also demonstrate that monochromatic
exposures of ~1011 watts/m2 are tolerated by biological macromolecules immersed in an optically transparent aqueous medium
due to fast thermal equilibrium at the micron scale.1630,1631 On the
other hand, the threshold of pain for ink-blackened human skin
exposed to a radiant heat stimulus is ~10,000 watts/m2 for 3-second
exposures.585
An electromagnetic wave passing through the human body declines
in intensity as it heats tissues and is attenuated approximately
according to:
I = I0 e(-2 αE dx
)
 (watts/m2
) {Eqn. 6.32}
where I = power per unit area transmitted through the tissue,
I0 ≤ 100 watts/m2 (maximum safe incident intensity), dx is depth of
tissue penetration (meters), and αE (meter-1) is the total attenuation
factor including scattering and absorption, the inverse of the mean
free path. For radio frequency and microwave radiation, αE = αe
νE
1/2, where νE is incident frequency (Hz) and αe ranges from 2 x
10-3 sec1/2 m-1 for muscle to 10 x 10-3 sec1/2 m-1 for vitreous humor
but averages ~5 x 10-3 sec1/2 m-1 for soft tissue.635 At 100 MHz,
99% of incident power is removed in a 5-cm path length of soft
tissue; at 1000 MHz (microwaves), 99% attenuation occurs within
~15 mm; at 106 MHz (far infrared), ~0.5 mm of tissue removes
99% of the energy. On the other hand, 53% of the incident energy
at 0.1 MHz passes through a 20-cm thick human body unscattered
and unabsorbed, thus remains available for utilization by medical
nanodevices seeking electrical power. The dependence of αE on νE
varies significantly across the electromagnetic spectrum;509,567,727
additionally, αE for different tissues may deviate by up to a factor of
10 from the average values shown in Figure 6.13, especially in the
IR-UV region.
Heetderks630 has analyzed the feasibility of transmitting electrical
power into the body using submillimeter receiver coils—a magnetic
transcutaneous link, which is preferred when large power-transfer
rates are required. In one of several designs, Heetderks starts with a
14-cm diameter transmitter coil (~diameter of the neck) with 11
turns (~40 microhenries inductance) and a 10 volt peak driving
voltage at a frequency of 2 MHz delivering 4 watts RMS into the
coil, a high but probably acceptable incident intensity of ~260 watts/
m2 at the skin. Inside the body, Heetderks uses a 400 micron diameter
ferrite-core receiver coil with 60 turns spaced 50 microns apart,
making a total receiver solenoid length of 3000 microns with ~0.89
microhenries inductance and Q = 40 for both transmitter and
receiver, giving a fractional energy loss per cycle of 2π / Q ~ 16%.
The receiver produces 1.1 volts and 320 microwatts in the ideal
case where the receiver lies coplanar within the circumference of
the transmitter coil. Large noncoplanar displacements may produce
significant performance declines.
Each of Heetderks’ receivers develops a power density of ~106
watts/m3
. Up to 600 receivers may be present within the volume of
operation of each transmitter, collectively drawing up to 10% of
unloaded transmitter coil power consistent with maintaining
Q ~40. In a nanomedical application, each receiver could act as a
microscopic power station, absorbing the externally supplied electromagnetic energy and then transducing it into other forms of energy
which may more directly be tapped by in vivo medical nanorobots.
In theory, a 100 watt/m2 flux imposed on the entire ~2 m2 human
body surface should allow the transdermal importation of ~20 watts,
enough to support a population of ~1012 10-pW nanorobots assuming
50% energy transduction efficiency among the widely dispersed
“power stations”.
How much smaller could Heetderk’s receivers be made? A detailed
design analysis is beyond the scope of this book, but a simple scaling
estimate may be made as follows. For a receiver coil of magnetic
inductance Lm (henries), resistance Rc (ohms), and rf waves of angular
frequency ωE (rad/sec), a coupling coefficient (kcoupling) between
transmitter and receiver coils may be crudely approximated as the
ratio of the power stored in the magnetic field of the LR oscillator
to the total power delivered to the receiver coil by the transmitter,
or (dividing out the terms for current) kcoupling ~ ωE Lm / (Rc + ωE Lm).
For νE = ωE / 2π, µ0 = 1.26 x 10-6 henry/m, µf ~5 (a self-inductance
factor when the receiver coil of Ncoil loops contains a ferrite core630),
ρwire = wire resistivity (~3 x 10-8 ohm-m), and L is the characteristic
size of the receiver (meters), then Lm ~ µ0 µf Ncoil2
 L3
, R ~ ρwire
Ncoil2
 / L, and

k ~1 k
 L coupling
1 m
E
4
− + ν
{Eqn. 6.33}
where km = ρwire / 2π µ0 µf ~ 10-3. For discrete-component (macroscopic) radios that receive broadcast signals, L ~ 1 cm and νE =
1-100 MHz, giving kcoupling = 0.9-0.999, which is very good. For
Heetderks’ submillimeter receiver designs, kcoupling = 10-3 - 10-5;
for example, the receiver described above has L ~ 700 microns,
νE = 2 MHz, giving kcoupling ~ 5 x 10-4, which is very poor. With
such poor coupling, very large transmitter intensities are required
to induce very small receiver power levels. Troyk and Schwan636 have
suggested that printed thin-film coils integrated directly with sensor
circuitry driven by a special transmitter coil topology could provide
adequate amounts of power to implanted coils having coupling
coefficients up to two orders of magnitude lower than Heetderks’
designs. However, even kcoupling ~ 10-7 at 2 MHz only reduces
receiver size to L ~ 500 microns, which is not much improvement.
The L4 scaling of kcoupling suggests that magnetic transcutaneous
power receivers smaller than ~500 microns may be impractical, given
the negligible amounts of magnetic field energy that can be stored
in nanoscale volumes (Section 6.2.4) and the likelihood that small
AC circuits will be heavily damped.10 (See also Section 7.2.3.)
Fig. 6.12. Occupational exposure limits to electromagnetic radiation as
equivalent plane-wave power density.824
Basic Capabilities • Power 165
However, efficient micron-scale MHz-frequency rf antennas may
still be feasible for individual nanorobots, as suggested by the
following simplistic analysis. Consider a simple spring pendulum
with a bob of mass mbob, density ρ (~diamondoid), thickness hbob,
and face area L2
, with nq charges and total charge Qbob = nq qe = L2
Cq (coul) permanently embedded on the bob surface, where Cq is
bob surface charge density. An oscillating rf field of strength Ee (volts/m)
and frequency νE drives the charges with a force F = Ee Qbob = mbob
abob at an acceleration abob (m/sec2
). The bob mass accelerates for a
half-cycle of duration t = (2 νE)
-1, periodically displacing a distance
xbob = (1/2) a t2 = Qbob Ee/ 8 mbob νE
2 and traveling at a mean
velocity vbob ~ 2 xbob νE. The local energy density produced by the
transmitter field is DE = (1/2) κe ε0 Ee
2 (joules/m3
) (variables defined
in Section 4.7.1, for water), with transmitter power intensity It = c
DE / n (watts/m2
) where c = 3 x 108 m/sec (speed of light) and n =
κe
1/2 is the refractive index for a nonmagnetic material at low frequency;
hence Ee = (2 It / κe
1/2 ε0 c)1/2 (volts/m). At the end of each half-cycle
the bob receives an energy E1/2 = (1/2) mbob vbob2
. Assuming
mechanical rectification, a lever arm connected to the charged bob
in the receiver transmits to the nanorobot a received power of Pn ~
2 E1/2 νE (watts); making the appropriate substitutions we have:

P
I L C
8 h c n
t
2
q
2
bob E e
1/2
0
= ρ νκ ε
( ) watts {Eqn. 6.34}
An additional constraint is that bob travel xbob must not exceed
the space available within a receiver housing of depth Ltrav. The bob
travels slower but farther at lower rf frequencies, and the lowest
possible operating frequency minimizes attenuation in tissues. Taking
xbob  n# hbob = Ltrav as a limit establishes a minimum operating
frequency that will not peg the bob against its stops, given by:

ν
ρ ε E
t q
2
2
bob
4
#
2
e
1/2
0
1/4
I C
32 h n c
  κ





 ( ) Hz {Eqn. 6.35}
Werequire a high charge density and thus assume Cq = 0.1 coul/m2
(~0.6 charge/nm2
), somewhat less than the ~0.16 coul/m2 for
charged amino acid molecules and the ~0.3 coul/m2 for a “fully
ionized surface”,1149 but well above the 0.005-0.02 coul/m2 recorded
experimentally for SiO2 on mica,1154 the 2 x 10-3 coul/m2 for the
electrodes in the electrostatic motor (Section 6.3.5) designed by
Drexler,10 and the 2 x 10-4 coul/m2 figure given by Lowell and
Rose-Innes1151 cited as typical for “highly charged surfaces.” For a
water-immersed bob, the DC surface field from this 0.1 coul/m2
charge density is a sustainable EDC = Cq / 2 κe ε0 = 76 megavolts/
meter.
Signal attenuation is minimal below ~1 MHz (Eqn. 6.32). Taking
It = 100 watts/m2
, L = 1 micron, ρ = 2000 kg/m3
, hbob = 20 nm, n#
= Ltrav / hbob = 50 for Ltrav = L, κe = 74.31 for 310 K water, and ε0 =
8.85 x 10-12 farad/m, then minimum νE = 0.17 MHz giving Pn ~ 0.8
pW delivered to the nanorobot producing a power density within
the housing of Dn = Pn / Ltrav L2 ~ 106 watts/m3
. In a practical
system, these receivers must be aligned precisely with the incident
field to maximize energy coupling, possibly requiring dynamic
orientation control of each onboard receiver. Resonating beam
structures 8-30 microns in size that can serve as rf filtering and
oscillator elements have been demonstrated experimentally at ~15
MHz.879 High-frequency sub-micron electrometers with charge per
unit bandwidth sensitivity of ~0.1 electron/Hz1/2 have been
demonstrated,2926 and submicron rf mechanical resonators have been
discussed by Cleland and Roukes.2927
In 1999, Pharma Seq3432 was developing laser-photon-powered
cubic ~250-micron rf microtransponders for use with oligonucleotide
probes in DNA assays; suspended in slurry, each device had an
integrated circuit storing the sequence of the oligo attached to it,
and emitted a coded signal (the probe’s serial number) to a nearby
receiver when a fluorophore-labeled target DNA molecule binded
to a complementary probe. However, direct visible-spectrum photonic powering of medical nanorobots in vivo is not promising except
within a few millimeters of the unclothed epidermis and only in the
presence of direct sunlight or strong artificial sources of illumination
(>10-100 watts/m2
) near maximum safe exposure limits, due to the
poor detection efficiency (low photon count rate sec-1 m-2) and rapid
attenuation of photons in human tissue (Section 4.9.4).
6.4.3 Tethered Power Transmission
Energy may be transferred to in vivo medical nanorobots via
physical tethers. Virtually all forms of power may be transmitted in
this fashion, including electrical, electromagnetic, acoustic, mechanical,
and chemical energy. A general discussion of various factors and
scenarios that favor or disfavor the use of tethers, as compared to
other methods of energy transmission, is in Section 6.4.3.6.
6.4.3.1 Electrical Tethers
One of the most obvious methods for providing energy to
nanodevices is simply to attach a power cord to each machine. The
bending moment of a wire is proportional to its radius to the fourth
power,642 so molecular nanowires1740,2866 are much more flexible
than macroscopic wires. These power cables could be made of
traditional metallic conductors (15-nm thick gold wires have been
fabricated on a Si substrate) or doped polyacetylene chains (Section
10.2.3.3) and other organic conductors which have been used to
make LEDs and polymer batteries.382
For an uninsulated single conductor of length L, square
cross-sectional area Aw, surface area A (~ 4 L Aw
1/2 for L >> Aw
1/2),
resistivity ρe, and surface emissivity er, carrying a steady current I
(amps) across a potential V (volts) and a resistance R (ohms),
developing power P (watts), transmitted power intensity PAw
(watts/m2
), and volumetric power density D (watts/m3
), which heats
the wire from ambient temperature T0 up to the maximum desired
Fig. 6.13. Estimated total attentuation factor αE (scattering +
absorption) for electromagnetic radiation passing through human
tissue.
166 Nanomedicine • Volume I
operating temperature Tmax, then from the standard electrical formulas
and Eqn. 6.19:

R L
A
e
W
= ρ {Eqn. 6.36}

I V
R
P
R ~
1/2 4 e A T T r W
3/2
max
4
0
4
e
1/2
= = 

 


 ( ) −







σ
ρ
{Eqn. 6.37}

V IR PR ~
4 e L T T
A
1/2 r e
2
max
4
0
4
W
1/2
1/2
= = ( )
 ( ) −







σ ρ
{Eqn. 6.38}

P I R ~ 4 e L A T T 2
r W
1/2
max
4
0
4 = σ ( ) − {Eqn. 6.39}

P P
A ~
4 e L T T
A A
W
r max
4
0
4
W
W 1/2 =
σ ( ) − {Eqn. 6.40}

D I
A ~
4 e T T
A
e
2
W
2
r max
4
0
4
W
1/2 = ( ) − ρ σ
{Eqn. 6.41}
where σ = 5.67 x 10-8 watt/m2
-K4 (Stefan-Boltzmann constant).
Thus for a silver wire 1 micron in diameter and 1 meter long, with
ρe = 1.6 x 10-8 ohm-m, er = 0.02 for polished silver, Tmax = 373 K
(boiling point of water) and T0 = 310 K (body temperature), then R
= 16,000 ohms, I = 50 microamps (current density Id ~ 5 x 107
amps/m2
), Aw = 1 micron2
, A ~ 4 mm2
, V = 0.9 volt, P = 50 microwatts (sufficient power to operate a load of ~45 electrostatic motors
~390 nm in diameter, as described in Section 6.3.5), and D = 5 x 107
watts/m3
. Note that the minimum quantum unit of resistance in
atomic- or molecular-scale wires is ~h/2e2 ~ 13,000 ohms, where h =
6.63 x 10-34 joule-sec (Planck’s constant) and e = 1.6 x 10-19 joule/eV,
due to quantized conductance (e.g., Coulomb blockade) in narrow
channels whose characteristic transverse dimension approaches the
electronic wavelength.1740 By 1998, metallic wires down to ~20 nm
in width had been fabricated.1517
Wires with electrical and thermal insulation can safely carry
higher currents in vivo (Section 6.5.5). If the wire in the preceding
example is wrapped with a thermal insulator of thickness dinsul and
thermal conductivity Kt, then the maximum current increases to:

I
KT TA d
L
t max 0 W insul
e
1/2
=  ( ) −




 ρ
{Eqn. 6.42}
Using water as the thermal insulator (Kt = 0.623 watt/m-K at
310 K), a dinsul = 1 micron layer allows the wire to rise to 373 K
while the outside of the insulating jacket remains near 310 K. A
100-micron thick water jacket allows electrical current and voltage
to safely rise by a factor of 10, thus power to rise by a factor of 100.
Another possibility is the fullerene (pure carbon) conductors
(Section 10.2.2.1). For example, 7-12 nm nanotube ropes 200-500
nm in length at ~310 K conduct ~50 nanoamperes at ~1 millivolt,
transmitting a total power of ~50 pW.641 Boron nitride coated carbon
nanotube wires should be highly oxidation-resistant.1308 Field
emission from room-temperature carbon atomic wires has been
measured as 0.1-1 microamperes at 80 volts, or ~10 microwatts.643
Nanowires a few nm wide and hundreds of microns long have already
been fabricated, and continuous meter-length threads (and longer)
have been proposed; current densities >1014 amps/m2 have been
pulled through a single chain of carbon atoms.643
If fullerene nanowires are doped with metal atoms, adding electrons
or holes so that the charge carrier density is high, electrical conductivity
may be precisely engineered from semiconductor levels up to equal
or better than copper in the plane of the graphene sheet. Multitube
cables may display a quantum confinement effect that sharply
reduces the resistance, possibly giving an electrical conductivity
10-100 times that of copper at room temperatures, and may provide
shielding comparable to coax. Doped electron-rich conductors are
easily oxidized on the nanometer scale, but wrapping such conductors
in a second concentric undoped outer nanotube provides an insulating
jacket that is effectively chemically impermeable under normal
conditions. By 1998, coaxial nanocables ~30 nm in diameter had
been fabricated in lengths up to 50 microns.2016 Boron-nitrogen
(BN) equivalents of fullerene nanotubes are physically strong and
good insulators. Low-temperature superconductivity has been demonstrated in doped644 and undoped3240 fullerenes.
An interesting alternative is a conveyor belt system for direct
mechanical charge transport, crudely analogous to the charging system
of a Van de Graff generator. Nanoscale conveyor belts (Section 3.4.3)
could transport ~106 electrons/sec at a belt speed of 4 mm/sec,
comparable to the ~1 cm/sec drift speed of electrons flowing in
macroscale wires (Section 6.5.5). This gives a 0.2 picoampere current
through a device with cross-sectional area ~(10 nm)2
, a modest current
density of ~103 amperes/m2 and electrostatic belt stress of ~1 atm
between adjacent charges spaced ~4 nm apart. If a much smaller
belt can be designed of a scale comparable to the 150-micron long
computer data storage tape (Section 7.2.6) described by Drexler,10
a belt speed of ~10 m/sec and charge density of ~1 electron/nm2
(~amino acid density) on a 1 nm2 belt gives a current of ~2
nanoamperes and a current density of ~109 amperes/m2
, comparable
to the electromigration-limited ~1010 amperes/m2 maximum current
density in bulk aluminum,* with an electrostatic belt stress of ~3600
atm. Net belt mechanical energy dissipation may be as low as ~10-6
zJ/nm of travel for each ~nanometer-scale charge carrying device
(Section 3.4.3).
6.4.3.2 Electromagnetic Tethers
Optical energy may be piped from one place to another by
allowing light to enter a narrow solid fiber of clear plastic or fused
silica. Light undergoes total internal reflection at the glass-air boundary
and follows the contours of the light pipe, with losses due to scattering
and absorption in the material as each photon undergoes up to ~105
reflections/meter during transit. The scattering minimum in
commercial ultrapure silica fiberoptic cable occurs at ~1500 nm, or
~2 x 1014 Hz, in the near infrared. These losses are roughly equivalent
to transmission in clear air, negligible over distances of relevance in
nanomedicine: measurable amounts of energy may be transmitted
through single fibers ~100 km long.
At the lowest frequencies, the cutoff frequency for electromagnetic
waveguides of diameter dguide filled with material of dielectric constant
κe, below which frequency the waveguide cannot transmit photons
(velocity c = 3 x 108 m/sec in vacuo, and slightly lower in various
dielectric materials at various frequencies), is νcutoff = c / 2 κe dguide
~ 7.5 x 1013 Hz (λ = 1000 nm) in the near infrared—close to the
scattering minimum at 1500 nm—for dguide = 2 microns and κe ~ 1.
This cutoff applies only to waveguides; coax (shielded single wire)
or triax (shielded twisted pair) lines can conduct frequencies all the
*This “maximum” may be quite conservative: “A single crystal metal wire surrounded by a strongly bonded, lattice-matched sheath should be stable at far greater current
densities than a conventional wire of the same material”.10
Basic Capabilities • Power 167
way down to DC and all the way up to near-infrared (Section
7.2.5.1.)
More specifically, if a nonmagnetic weak dielectric (~air) fills
the space between two coaxial cylindrical conductors, with inside
wire of radius rin, outer jacket of radius rout and line current Iline,
then the average transmitted power727 is given by:

P 30 I ln r
r E line
2 out
in
= 




 (watts) {Eqn. 6.43}
In coax theory,727 rout/rin = 1.65 allows maximum power to be
carried at a given breakdown voltage gradient across the dielectric
(most appropriate for power transmission), whereas rout/rin = 3.6
gives the lowest attenuation due to conductor losses for a given outer
diameter (most appropriate for communications applications). Thus
for a 1-micron power coax, rout = 0.5 micron implies rin = 0.3 micron;
assuming Iline ~ 108 amps/m2 on the inside wire, PE ~ 104 pW at ~1
millivolt and the line has a characteristic impedance of 30 ohms.
For the highest frequencies, optical fibers may be as small as
~0.5-1 micron in diameter, roughly the photon wavelength—a
dielectric rod can serve as a waveguide crudely analogous to the
hollow metal pipes used at rf frequencies. Blue photons (~400 nm)
carry ~500 zJ of energy, almost enough to break C-C bonds (~550 zJ).
Ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths shorter than ~300 nm are greatly
attenuated for fiber lengths >1 meter due to heavy absorption, and
intense prolonged UV irradiation of silica creates defects (color
centers) in the material that lead to further absorption of the laser
light in the fiber.
In biomedical applications, silica fibers are used to conduct
photons from excimer lasers, the brightest known sources of UV
radiation.3539,3540 Typical maximum continuous power intensities
are ~30,000 watts/m2 for corneal sculpting, ~105 watts/m2 for bile
duct cholangiocarcinoma tumor surgery, and ~106 watts/m2 for
arterial debulking, laser dental machining and laser lithotripsy for
kidney stones,645,646 so ~0.01-1 microwatts may be delivered to
medical nanodevices using a single ~1 micron2 optical tether transmitting UV photons. The maximum transmittable power intensity
is approximated by Eqn. 6.40; taking er = 0.80 for silica, Aw
1/2 = 1 mm
diameter fiber, L = 1 meter and Tmax - T0 = 20 K at room temperature
for a handheld surgical instrument, then PAw ~ 4 x 105 watts/m2
, in
line with the above figures for excimer lasers assuming a ~40% duty
cycle. For a nanomedical optical power cable with Aw
1/2 = 1 micron
diameter fiber, L = 1 meter, T0 = 310 K and Tmax ≤ 373 K, then PAw
~ 109 watts/m2 and a maximum of P ~ 1 milliwatts may be delivered
down the fiber. However, at this high fluence there is tremendous
risk of localized tissue incineration, should the fiber detach in vivo
and the photon flow is not immediately halted—a good argument
for limiting optical power tether intensities to <105 watts/m2 or
less. A thin adjacent backchannel fiber could serve as a fuse, rupturing
simultaneously with the main fiber and cutting off the feedback
control signal.
6.4.3.3 Hydraulic and Acoustic Tethers
Power is easily conveyed to medical nanodevices through tethers
by simple hydraulic means. For example, a virtually leakproof
thick-walled fullerene nanotube measuring 2rtube = 1 micron in
diameter and ltube = 1 meter long could safely transport pressurized
fluid of absolute viscosity η = 6.9 x 10-4 kg/m-sec (310 K water) at
a fluid pressure ptube = 5 atm to drive a mechanical turbine or valved
reciprocating piston system, establishing an energy density of 0.5
pJ/micron3 and delivering Pn = π rtube
4
 ptube2 / 8 η ltube ~ 10 pW to
a Vn = 1 micron3
 nanorobot power plant at a fluid flow velocity of
vfluid = rtube2
 ptube / 8 η ltube ~ 20 microns/sec and producing a power
density of ~107
 watts/m3
, assuming Poiseuille flow.
Acoustic waves could be delivered by tether, but slightly larger
tubes are required. Consider a water-filled pipe with dimensions as
defined in the previous paragraph which is excited at one end by a
vibrating piston operating at a frequency νp << vsound/rtube (~1 GHz
for 2rtube = 1 micron). For such small tubes, the inertia and kinetic
reaction of the fluid may be neglected in favor of the frictional force
(e.g., Poiseuille flow; Eqn. 9.25), since the compressions and
rarefactions of the fluid are practically isothermal on account of the
almost perfect heat conduction, and the power transmission is given
by:
Pn = P0 e(-2 αtube ltube) (watts) {Eqn. 6.44}
with the attenuation coefficient given by Rayleigh’s classical
formulation:649,650

α
πγην
ρ
tube
p
sound
2
tube
2
1/2
8
v r =





 {Eqn. 6.45}
where γ is the ratio of specific heats (1.004 for water, 1.009 for
seawater), vsound = 1500 m/sec and ρ = 993.4 kg/m3 for water at
310 K. Maximum energy transfer (like a rigid bar) occurs at integral
multiples of half-wavelengths of the incident sonic waves, in other
words, at νp = n vsound / 2 ltube, where n = 1 is the fundamental
frequency or first harmonic, n = 2 is the first overtone or second
harmonic, and so forth. Minimum attenuation occurs at n = 1, the
first harmonic.
A periodic source pulse of an intensity low enough to avoid
cavitation in pure water (~104 watts/m2
; Section 6.4.1) applied as
input power P0 across a tube area of π rtube2 produces a 10 pW
output power for ltube ≤ 300 microns at νp = 2.5 MHz and rtube = 0.5
microns with P0 = 8000 pW and αtube ~11,000 m-1. To get ltube = 1
meter length requires rtube = 15 microns and νp = 750 Hz to deliver
10 pW at the output. (A three-phase “alternating current” acoustical
power transmission system using 100 Hz waves traversing three
water-filled pipes was patented by M. Constantinesco in 1920.)650
Diamond rods can also make nearly lossless acoustic power
transmission lines (Section 7.2.5.3).
6.4.3.4 Gear Trains and Mechanical Tethers
Lengthy nanoscale gear trains may transmit power over great
distances because mechanical efficiency for steric nanogear pairs may
be ~99.997% (Section 6.3.2). Thus the initial mechanical input
power only falls to 94% after passing through a sequential gear train
of 2000 units, a 10-micron long train assuming each gear is ~5 nm
in diameter.
Torque power may also be transmitted via a long rotating cable
inside a fixed tubular sheath, somewhat resembling an automobile
speedometer cable or a dentist’s drill (~10-100 Hz). (Reciprocating
cables are briefly treated in Section 7.2.5.4.) Two modes of power
transmission are readily distinguished—first, a twist-and-release or
“AC” strategy, resulting in the propagation of a torsion wave which
looks locally like a shear wave, and second, a constant-twist or “DC”
strategy, in which a driver end turns the cable at a constant rate (up
to the bursting velocity) and the cable is maintained at constant
torque (up to the shear strength limit). In the following analysis, we
consider a cylindrical transmission cable of radius rcable, length Lcable,
168 Nanomedicine • Volume I
and density ρ, with shear modulus G and working stress σw. The
author thanks J. Soreff for helpful clarifications.
The AC case may be thought of as the propagation of a shear
sound wave with maximum shear σw and maximum strain smax =
σw/G, traveling at vshear ~ (G/ρ)
1/2, the transverse wave velocity in
the cable medium. The maximum power passing through the cable
is PAC = π rcable2
 DE vshear, where energy density DE ~ G smax2 = σw
2 / G,
hence:

P ~ r
 G
AC
cable
2
w
2
1/2 1/2
π σ
ρ (watts) {Eqn. 6.46}
limiting maximum cable operating frequency to ~vshear/Lcable or:
{Eqn. 6.47}
In the DC case, the maximum surface speed of a spinning cable
is the flywheel bursting speed vburst ~ (σw / ρ)
1/2 and the maximum
shear stress is ~σw. Ignoring the minor complication that a real cable
cannot withstand maximum static shear and maximum tangential
velocity simultaneously, the maximum power passing through the
cable is approximated by PDC ~ π rcable2 σw vburst, so:

P ~ r DC cable
2
w
3/2
1/2
π σ
ρ
( ) watts {Eqn. 6.48}
limiting maximum cable operating frequency to ~vburst / 2 π rcable or:
{Eqn. 6.49}
Hence PDC/PAC ~ (G / σw)
1/2 ~ 7, taking G = 5 x 1011 N/m2 and
σw ~ 1010 N/m2 for a diamondoid cable, so the initial conclusion is
that the DC strategy allows transmission of ~1 order of magnitude
higher mechanical power than the AC strategy, for a given cable size
and material. A cable, secured at one end and twisted through a
maximum angle θmax at the other end, acquires at maximum stress an
energy Ecable = (1/2) ktorsion θmax2 where ktorsion = π G rcable
4 / 2 Lcable;
setting Ecable = π rcable2
 Lcable DE gives θmax = 2 Lcable σw / rcable G ~ 4
radians for an Lcable = 1 micron and rcable = 10 nm diamondoid
cable.
The AC cable may suffer transmission losses due to shear wave
radiation from an oscillating torque.10 However, this radiation can
be suppressed by imposing the torque between the cable and a coaxial
sheath, or by imposing opposite torques on a pair of cables, both
going from the same transmitter to the same receiver. In either case,
no net torque need be imposed on the surrounding medium; even
startup transients may be cancelled in the latter case. Thermally
induced transient irregularities may still interact with the moving
cable to radiate some power, but this remains a minor effect. A
rotating cable suffers small additional transmission losses due to
frictional interactions with the jacket in which it is encased, but
drag power losses are much less than shear wave radiation losses in
most nanoscale applications,10 so transmission efficiency is very
nearly 100%. In some cases, there may be an additional strain limit
imposed by supercoiling. Interestingly, double-stranded free DNA
in vivo behaves much like a cable under torsional stress, with one
negative superhelical turn per 100-200 base pairs (34-68 nm of
“cable”); torsional stress is relieved by unwinding the double helix.997
However, thermal safety of in vivo mechanical power tethers is
also of paramount concern. Under severe braking, loading or jamming
of a cable, significant heat may be released. For a cable in vivo, a
temperature rise of 63 K at the outer jacket surface (e.g., in contact
with body fluids) boils water. Even a ∆T > 10 K may constitute an
unacceptable risk in a conservative nanomedical design, as this is
more than enough to trigger biological responses, for example by
heat-shock proteins (HSPs). (Activation of HSPs in some cases may
be beneficial to human health, but conservative nanomedical
design requires minimizing all such unplanned side-effects.)
In the most optimistic scenario, power is immediately shut off
the instant a fault is detected, instantly converting a DC cable into
a half-cycle AC cable under relaxation. To prevent stored energy
from causing damage in the event of a heat pulse, a DC cable should
never be operated faster than the fastest physically equivalent AC
cable, e.g., νDC  νACm.
In the most pessimistic scenario, the cable jams at a single
pointlike defect and then radiates the entire power flux from a sphere
of radius ~rcable; the practical effect is to preclude power cables
altogether, because total cable power could not be allowed to
exceed the heat flux from a droplet of water of radius ~rcable whose
temperature had been raised by ∆T.
An intermediate, yet conservative, scenario allows that the entire
power flux (not just the energy already stored in the cable) must be
dissipated, but that the whole length of the cable may be employed
as the radiator during a dissipative event—as, for example, if power
continues to be transmitted after the fault but the cable jacket retains
physical integrity. In this scenario, a cable carrying power flux Ipower
(W/m2
) through a medium of heat capacity CV and thermal conductivity Kt overheats the immediate environment in a time toverheat
~ Lcable CV ∆T / Ipower, but thermal equilibration time tEQ ~ Xbio2
CV / Kt where Xbio is a characteristic thermal conduction path length
(e.g., minimum-size biological elements of size Xbio ~ 1 micron).
Requiring for safety that toverheat > tEQ, then Ipower < (Kt Lcable ∆T /
Xbio2
), which defines considerably more restrictive operating
frequency limits for cables.
For an AC cable in the intermediate thermal scenario, the energy
density per cycle is ~(1/2) DE, giving at maximum frequency νACt
 a
power flux of IAC = νACt
 Lcable σw
2
 / 2 G, hence:
{Eqn. 6.50}
For a DC cable in the intermediate thermal scenario, power flux
is IDC = σw vburst = 2 π νDCt
 rcable σw, hence:
{Eqn. 6.51}
Adopting the intermediate scenario, the general conclusion
is that very small cables tend to be thermally limited, while very
large cables are both thermally and mechanically limited. In the
following configurations, we assume a diamondoid cable with
∆T = 10 K, ρ = 3510 kg/m3 for diamond, Kt = 0.623 W/m-K for
water at 310 K, and Xbio = 1 micron.
An AC cable carrying a power throughput of π rcable2
 IAC =
1000 pW (near-peak nanorobot requirement) with rcable = 5 nm
and Lcable = 2 microns is thermally limited to an operating frequency
of νACt  60 KHz (<< νACm ~ 6 GHz), giving a power density of
IAC / Lcable = 6 x 1012 W/m3
. The same cable in DC mode is
thermally limited to an operating frequency of νDCt  40 KHz
(<< νDCm ~ 70 GHz) with the same power density. If thermal limits
Basic Capabilities • Power 169
were ignored, the cable could carry 0.2 milliwatts in AC mode and
1 milliwatt in DC mode.
Similarly, an AC cable carrying a power throughput of π rcable2
IAC = 100 watts (human basal requirement) with rcable = 4 microns
and Lcable = 0.4 meter is mechanically limited to an operating
frequency of νACm  30 KHz (< νACt ~ 60 KHz), again giving a
power density of IAC / Lcable = 6 x 1012 W/m3
. The same cable in
DC mode is thermally limited to an operating frequency of νDCt  10
MHz (< νDCm ~ 100 MHz) with the same power density. If thermal
limits were ignored, the cable would still carry only 100 watts in
AC mode but could carry up to 700 watts in DC mode.
The refractive index profile of a sufficiently wide (Section 6.4.3.2)
rotating diamond cable could be engineered, and might possibly be
made sufficiently transparent, to also act as a photonic channel
simultaneously conveying optical power or communications signals.
6.4.3.5 Chemical Tethers
Chemical energy may also be delivered by tether at power densities
> 1010 watts/m3
. Single tethers could bring ATP, glucose, or synthetic
energy storage molecules (Section 6.2.3) directly to nanodevices in
vivo. Double-tether cables could carry two hypergolic fuels, or a
separate fuel and oxidizer, in a paired cable under pressure with the
components mixed on site to release their stored energy. At
1000-10,000 atm pressures, most organic substances should
undergo a hypergolic (spontaneous) reaction with oxygen piped in at
equivalent pressure; safety would be a primary concern with this
approach. Chemical tethers may also be used to resupply macroscopic energy organs (Section 6.4.4), or to exchange chemicals with
an artificial nanoliver or other chemical modulating, processing, or
synthesizing implanted nano-organs.
6.4.3.6 Power Tether Configurations In Vivo
If an application requires only a very small number of nanodevices
operating in a very limited tissue volume for a brief period of time,
then direct tethered power supply might be preferred. Tethered devices
may employ simpler onboard energy conversion systems, hence may
be appropriate for devices of more primitive design such as may
exist in the early years of nanomedical technology development.
Tethered power systems could be useful when working inside a tissue
volume that has been drained of indigenous useful chemical energy
resources and which has no bloodflow or active homeostatic
processes, such as amputated limbs, massively ischemic organs, or
cryogenically preserved tissues or bodies. Tethered power might also
be acceptable for operations inside tissues with incomplete, nonexistent, or low-density vascularization, such as the epidermis, or
inside tissues with incompetent or compromised immune systems,
such as an embryo or fetus. In cyto slaved nanodevices may transmit/
receive power or data to/from an extracellular master nanorobot via
transmembrane tethers (Section 9.4.5.6).
The two principal drawbacks to tethered supplies are physical
vulnerability and tissue irritation (see also Section 7.3.3). Tethers
may kink, break, or become tangled; failures in rotating cable tethers
may include “drilling” and “weed-whacker” modes, chemical tethers
can detach and leak, and so forth. If billions or trillions of medical
nanodevices are deployed, these vulnerabilities are enhanced. In
addition, tether volume may equal or exceed nanorobot volume,
increasing intrusiveness and reducing nanorobot mobility. For instance,
a 10 cm long tether measuring 20 nm in diameter that might be
used to power a ~1 micron3 device has a volume of ~30 micron3
—
a clear case of the tail wagging the dog. Limb/organ macromotions
and tissue micromovements may produce a microscale sawing action
of tether fibers against tissues, causing irritation, inflammation
(including leukokine release with macrophage and fibroblast
mobilization), and possibly a granulomatous reaction unless tethers
can be made with variable compliance to match the stiffness of the
tissues through which they pass, adding greatly to design complexity.
Mobile tethers deployed inside cells can mechanically excite
cytoskeletal elements, eventually triggering unwanted gene expression
cascades in the nucleus. Tethers deployed through blood vessel walls
or cell membranes may face similar challenges regardless of the
chemical biocompatibility of their exterior or sheathing surfaces.
The simplest tethered configuration for powering large numbers of
nanorobots is to transmit external power into an energy organ
(Section 6.4.4) using a single tether connection. A complete analysis of
networks and configurations of more complex tethered nanorobot
power supplies is beyond the scope of this book. However, several
simple configurations include Cartesian, fractal, and hub systems.
A Cartesian system is laid out along a regular gridwork using a
rectangular, cylindrical, spherical, helical, or other coordinate system
as appropriate to the biotopology. A fractal system resembles a
branching vascular-like “power tree” inside the body, with tendrils
following blood or lymph vessels and natural tissue graining. A hub
system (aka “mother ship”) employs an array of isolated distribution
nodes, with numerous individual nanorobots directly connected to
one or another node.
Tethers must be directed entirely through tissue; placement in
the active bloodflow may precipitate prompt thrombosis from
microturbulence shear forces or netting action with formed elements.
Macrophagic responses characteristic of wound repair (Chapter 24)
would likely be stimulated within hours of tissue entry as cellular
shear force sensors activate cytokine signaling mechanisms in response
to mechanical stresses. To avoid massive granulomatous reaction,
tethers cannot be abandoned after use and probably must be spooled
out during deployment and respooled during retraction, adding
additional potential failure modes and increasing the time required
for deployment or retraction, a major drawback in emergency
situations.
It might be possible to carefully install a biocompatible electrical
or fiberoptic power network throughout a patient’s body (Section
7.3.1) as a permanent augmentation without causing irreparable
damage. The presence of great numbers of isolated current-carrying
wires creates numerous stray electrical fields that could affect cellular
processes and possibly stimulate a macrophagic response; however,
electric fields are minimal outside a well-shielded 1-micron-diameter
coax or twisted-pair triax cable. If ~1 micron stray-field-free cables
or optical fibers are used, a total network volume of ~10 cm3 of
fiber (~0.01% of human body volume) has ~13,000 kilometers of
length; assuming ~1-meter strands and a simple Cartesian distribution,
fibers have a mean lateral separation of ~80 microns between nearest
neighbors (~4 cell widths).
6.4.4 Dedicated Energy Organs
Delivery of energy to in vivo nanorobots via tethers necessarily
involves a hierarchical distribution network of some kind, ranging
from maximum span (e.g., maximally horizontal hierarchy: all units
directly connected to the external source) to minimum span (e.g.,
maximally vertical hierarchy: all units connected in series). Many
intermediate network topologies are readily imaginable. Networks
typically are most efficient at some optimum mix of spans and levels.
To support this optimum mix, dedicated energy storage organs
positioned at network nodes can add stability and longevity to the
system and provide load buffering. Energy organs may act as
distribution or routing devices, simply passing power down the line,
or they may act as output nodes which are periodically encountered
170 Nanomedicine • Volume I
or revisited by in vivo nanorobots to recharge or refuel depleted
onboard energy stores.
For example, we may envision a permanent macroscopic
implanted device with a transdermal connector port. Through this
port, the user recharges the internal energy organ by plugging in a
source of compressed gas, by connecting through the port to a battery
or a household electrical wall outlet, or by attaching an antenna
system to facilitate the receipt of acoustic, mechanical, inductive,
rf, infrared, or optical power signals. Chemical tethers could also
resupply these energy organs: Assuming Poiseuille flow (Eqn. 9.25),
~40 mm3
/sec of stoichiometric oxyglucose fuel supply at 1000 atm
pressure differential flowing (separately) through a double-tether
~1 meter in length and ~60 microns in diameter supplies the entire
100-watt human basal power requirement assuming 50% chemical
energy conversion efficiency at the receiving end, with the glucose
supplied in a saturated 70% aqueous solution at 310 K. Chemical
tether power density ~ 4 x 1010 watts/m3
.
Inside the body, components of the implant may protrude into
tissues or the bloodstream to supply power to internal nanorobots.
These protrusions could act in broadcast mode, emitting acoustic
or electrical power intracorporeally. Circumaortic current-carrying
loops could energize bloodborne nanorobots as they passed through
the vascular solenoid, although energy transfer efficiency may be
low (Section 6.4.2) and possible biological effects of these electric
fields on cellular systems should be studied further. Energy organ
protrusions could release manufactured artificial energy-rich molecules
(Section 6.2.3) or microscale fuel tankers containing energetic
compounds directly into the bloodstream. Protrusions might act as
“energy teats” to which nanorobots could dock and refuel or recharge,
although this will require navigational beacons, docking mechanisms,
transfer conduits, etc., thus increasing system complexity. Energy
organ protrusions could also serve as catalytic or conversion nodes,
transducing one form of energy into another, or as manufacturing
nodes, converting less energetic chemicals into more energetic
chemicals through the application of externally supplied energy. In
all these cases, biocompatibility is a critical issue that must be fully
addressed3234 (Chapter 15).
Dedicated energy organs may range in size from hundreds of
microns up to several centimeters, depending on the position in the
distribution hierarchy and the task to be performed, and may
themselves be recharged from other larger energy organs positioned
higher up in the hierarchy, or directly from external sources. Given
the maximum conventional energy storage density of ~1011 joules/m3
(Section 6.2), the human basal energy requirement of ~2000 Kcal
for one day could be stored in a (>4.4 cm)3 cube. A special case is
the nuclear powered energy organ containing a similar volume of
Gd148 radionuclide, which could provide the same basal requirement
for ~centuries (Section 6.3.7.1). Although a nuclear-powered organ
is unlikely to be implemented in this manner, from Eqn. 6.27 a
sphere of Gd148 emitting ~100 watts with a 75-year half-life and
measuring 3.41 cm in diameter with a 5-micron Pt shield glows at
1326 K (er for Pt at 1326 K is 0.156; Gd melting point ~1585 K, Pt
melting point ~2042 K); this is approximately the decomposition
temperature of diamond (into graphite) and well above the
combustion point for diamond in air (Section 6.5.3), so Pt-coated
sapphire (sapphire melting point ~2310 K1602) may provide a
more stable first wall for the radionuclide energy organ. Carnot
thermal efficiency for a heat engine using this source could reach,
at most, ~76%.
6.5 Design Energetics Assessment
6.5.1 Power in Biological Cells
Table 6.8 summarizes the total power outputs and power densities
of various cells in the human body, adapted from numerous
experimental studies on tissue metabolism using assumed cell
volumes as listed. Relatively inactive red cells produce only ~0.01
pW, while thermogenic fat cells may release 8 million times more
energy during shivering. Muscle cells and platelets have very low
basal rates, but are capable of brief bursts of high power density.
The typical human tissue cell operates at ~30 pW and at this power
level has ~2000 sec of free glucose energy available solely from
internal stores without requiring external resupply, assuming ~50%
energy conversion efficiency. Biological power densities range from
102
-106 watts/m3
, with the typical tissue cell operating at about 3800
watts/m3
. The active flight muscle of the honeybee has the highest
known power density in biology (3.4 million watts/m3
).
6.5.2 Thermogenic Limits In Vivo
Consider nanorobots at work inside a single biological cell of
size Lcell, volume Vcell = Lcell
3
, and thermal conductivity Kt = 0.623
watts/m-K (water) immersed in a large isothermal heat sink. The
maximum temperature differential ∆Tn between core and periphery
caused by the intracellular release of Pcell (watts) due to nanorobot
activity is:

∆T P
6 L K
D L
6 K cell
cell
cell t
cell cell
2
t
= = (kelvins) {Eqn. 6.52}
where Dcell is total cellular energy density (watts/m3
). A typical ~20
micron diameter human tissue cell produces 30-480 pW, giving
∆Tcell = 0.3-6.0 microkelvins. The data in Table 6.8 indicates that
individual cells appear to safely tolerate internal energy releases up
to Dcell ~ 106 watts/m3
, which leads to the following proposed
thermogenic limit for in cyto operations:
Pcell  106
 Vcell (watts) {Eqn. 6.53}
Thus, for example, using the proposed limit an isolated 20-micron
tissue cell can safely host in its interior a set of active nanorobotic
machinery that in total generates Pcell ~ 8000 pW and raises cell
temperature by ∆Tcell ~ 100 microkelvins, which seems extremely
conservative.
If many cells in a given block of tissue contain active
nanomachinery, as will often be the case, then the assumption of an
isothermal heat sink no longer holds because the nanorobots will
collectively warm up their operating environment. In the limit of
an entire human body, a 100-watt total nanorobot power expenditure
giving a whole-body 1000 watt/m3 incremental power density (Table
6.8) seems quite conservative since 50,000-100,000 watts/m3 is
considered the safe therapeutic range for medical diathermy.819 A
temperature rise in the tissues triggers an increase in blood flow,
which in turn produces a cooling effect. The maximum thermal
load that an adult can dissipate under room temperature conditions
without an increase in body temperature is a whole-body exposure
of 100 watts/m2
,
822 or ~2000 watts/m3
. Thus a 100-watt whole-body
nanorobot power budget normally will produce no measurable increase
in body temperature.
Basic Capabilities • Power 171
Operated at its peak output of 1600 watts,780,865 the human
body’s core temperature rises ~3.5 K.821 Even assuming a simple
linear relation, a whole-body 100-watt nanorobot power budget
would correspond to an increase in core body temperature of at
most ~0.2 K, far smaller than the mean normal diurnal variation of
~1 K (Section 6.3.1) and less than the ~0.2-0.5 K load error in the
human thermoregulatory control system.865 Since glucose-powered
nanorobots may compete with tissues for fuel, a 100-watt total
withdrawal also represents ~2000 Kcal/day, near the limit of what
can be conveniently replaced dietetically on a long-term basis.
A proper comprehensive analysis of energy flows818 requires a
detailed model of body geometry, incident radiation, skin emissivity,
convection currents, heat exchange by conduction, evaporative
cooling, respiratory heat losses, physiological and behavioral thermoregulatory responses, work done by the patient, and the precise
distribution, clumping patterns and activities of in vivo nanorobots,
all of which is very complex and quite beyond the scope of this
book. However, a simple log-linear interpolative relation with correct
endpoints (Dtiss = 106 watts/m3 at Ltiss = 20 microns and Dtiss = 103
watts/m3 at Ltiss = 0.5 meters) suggests the following proposed crude
Table 6.8 Estimated Power Output and Measured Power Density of Biological Cells and Human Tissues
Estimated Assumed Measured Compiled, Computed
Power Output Volume Power Density or Estimated from:
Organelle, Cell or Object (picowatts) (micron3
) (watts/m3
) (References)
Myosin muscle motor 0.000001 5 x 10-7 2.0 x 106 578
Bacterial flagellar motor 0.0001 5 x 10-5 2.0 x 106 581
S. faecalis bacterium (basal) 0.00035 0.2 1.8 x 103 798
Platelet (resting) 0.003-0.09 3 0.1-3.0 x 104 791,792,796
Red blood cell 0.008 94 8.5 x 101 789
E. coli bacterium (basal) 0.05 2 2.5 x 102 797
Mitochondrion organelle 0.1-1.1 1 0.1-1.1 x 106 781,786
S. faecalis bacterium (maximum growth) 0.23 0.2 1.2 x 106 798
Chondrocyte 0.3 670 4.0 x 102 744
Platelet (activated) 0.7-7.0 3 0.2-2.3 x 106 790
Skin cell 1-3 1000 1.0-3.1 x 103 744,783,794,818
Skeletal muscle cell (resting) 1-10 2000 0.5-4.9 x 103 526.744.818
Neutrophil leukocyte 2-9 450 0.4-2.0 x 104 753,792,796
Osteocyte (bone) 2-38 30,000 0.08-1.3 x 103 744,818
Pancreatic cell 9 1000 8.9 x 103 745
Relaxed resting cardiac muscle cell 16 8000 2.0 x 103 788
Diaphragm muscle cell 20 2000 1.0 x 104 744
Liver cell (hepatocyte) 45-115 6400 0.7-1.8 x 104 744,745,782,783,818
Typical Tissue Cell (basal) 30 8000 3.8 x 103 744,745,782
T-Cell lymphocyte (basal) 40 200 2.0 x 105 470,777
Bone marrow cell 45 8000 5.6 x 103 745
Intestine/Stomach cell 46-52 8000 5.7-6.5 x 103 745
Testicular cell 46-149 8000 0.6-1.9 x 104 745
Lung cell 56-78 8000 7.1-9.7 x 103 744,745,782
Brown fat cell (resting) 60 200,000 3.0 x 102 745,818
Spleen cell 60-80 8000 7.5-9.9 x 103 745
Neuron cell (basal) 70-110 14,000 5.0-7.9 x 103 744,745,747,779,782
Thymus cell 74 8000 9.3 x 103 745
Heart muscle cell (typical) 87-290 8000 1.1-3.6 x 104 744,782,783,795,818
Skeletal muscle cell (max., voluntary) 113 2000 5.7 x 104 818
Thyroid cell 130 8000 1.6 x 104 745
T-Cell lymphocyte (antigen response) 130 200 6.5 x 105 470,777
Adrenal cell 150 8000 1.9 x 104 745
Kidney cell 155-346 8000 1.9-4.3 x 104 744,745,782,818
Neuron cell (maximum) 255-330 14,000 1.8-2.4 x 104 746,779
Typical Tissue Cell (maximum) 480 8000 6.0 x 104 745,780,782
Skeletal muscle cell (max., tetanic) 2300 2000 1.2 x 106 526
Honeybee flight muscle cell 3400 1000 3.4 x 106 ---
Heart muscle cell (maximum) 3500-5000 8000 4.4-6.3 x 105 783,787
Pancreatic islet (multi-cell) 50,000-90,000 8,000,000 0.6-1.1 x 104 793
Brown fat cell (thermogenic) 64,000 200,000 3.2 x 105 786
Human brain 15-25 watts 1.4 x 10-3 m3 1.1-1.8 x 104 746,747,784,785
Human body (basal) 100 watts 0.1 m3 1.0 x 103 780
Human body (maximum) 1600 watts 0.1 m3 1.6 x 104 780
Gasoline-powered automobile 200,000 watts 10 m3 2.0 x 104 Author’s 1969 Oldsmobile
The Sun 3.92 x 1026 watts 1.41 x 1027 m3 0.28 1662
172 Nanomedicine • Volume I
maximum thermogenic limits for nanorobot operations in human
soft tissue:
Ptiss  Vtiss Dtiss (watts) {Eqn. 6.54}
Dtiss ~ 10[2.77 - 0.687 log10 (Ltiss)] (watts/m3
) {Eqn. 6.55}

∆T ~ P
1800 L tiss tiss
tiss
π/2 (kelvins) {Eqn. 6.56}
where Vtiss = Ltiss
3 for the total volume of soft tissue in which all
deployed nanorobots are active. (Eqns. 6.52 through 6.56 are
summarized in Figs. 6.14 and 6.15). Thus, for example, medical
nanorobots deployed solely in the thyroid gland (Ltiss ~ 2.6 cm;
Table 8.9) should be restricted to a maximum total power budget
Ptiss ~ 0.1 watt which elevates thyroid temperature by ∆Ttiss ~ 0.02
K. Higher in vivo power densities may sometimes be justified in
hospital or emergency medical situations (Chapter 24), and a few
other special circumstances (e.g., Chapter 21).
6.5.3 Nanorobot Power Scaling
As an initial, crude order-of-magnitude estimate of nanorobot
power consumption, allometric scaling of metabolism in biology
for whole organisms follows a 3/4 power law.698,3242 Normalizing
to P = 100 watts for an m = 70 kg human body mass and assuming
~water density for nanorobots, then P = (4.13) m3/4 = 23 pW for a
1 micron3
 nanorobot, a power density of Dn ~ 2 x 107
 watts/m3
.
Surface power intensity considerations drive maximum
nanorobot onboard power density. For instance, the maximum safe
intensity for ultrasound is 100-1000 watts/m2 (pain threshold for
human hearing ~100 watts/m2
) (Section 6.4.1) and the conservative
maximum safe electromagnetic intensity is also ~100 watts/m2
(Section 6.4.2). Additionally, a surface at 373 K (boiling water) relative
to a 310 K environment radiates 100-1000 watts/m2 at emissivities
er = 0.1-1 (Eqn. 6-19). Conservatively taking 100 watts/m2 as the
maximum safe energy flux across the surface of a spherical nanorobot
of radius rn, then the maximum nanorobot power density is

D 300
r n ~ 10 (watts/m n
9 3 = ) {Eqn. 6.57}
for a device ~1 micron in diameter—the largest safe whole-device
power density that should be developed in vivo. A 109 watt/m3
maximum implies a ~1000 pW limit for 1 micron3 nanorobots.
Interestingly, the energy dissipation rate required to disrupt the
plasma membrane of ~95% of all animal cells transported in forced
turbulent capillary flows is on the order of ~108
-109
 watts/m3
.
1185
For chemically powered foraging nanorobots, another fundamental
constraint on power density is imposed by diffusion limits on fuel
molecules. From Eqn. 3.4, the maximum diffusion current of glucose
molecules of energy content Efuel = Eglu (4765 zJ; Eqn. 6.16), burned
at efficiency e% ~ 0.50 (50%) in oxygen, to the surface of a spherical
nanorobot of radius rn will support a maximum onboard power
density of:

D 3 e% E D C
r diff
fuel
n
2 = ( /) watts m3 {Eqn. 6.58}
For D = 7.1 x 10-10 m2
/sec for glucose in water at 310 K (Table
3.3), C = (0.67) 3.5 x 1024 molecules/m3 in (newborn and) adult
Fig. 6.14. Recommended maximum total nanomachinery power
consumption in isolated cells and in human tissue.
Fig. 6.15. Maximum temperature change produced by nanorobot
power released in isolated cells and in human tissue.
*Since oxyglucose foraging nanorobots are not seriously glucose-limited, there is little to be gained by enabling energy organs or cooperative nanorobot populations to secrete
insulin/glucagon hormones (mimicking the pancreas), cortisol hormones, etc. to artificially manipulate serum glucose levels. Available oxygen also may be artificially
manipulated using nanorobotic compressed gas dispensers1400 or by other means (Chapter 22).
**Note that as nanodevices get smaller, their surface/volume ratio expands. Thus the Square/Cube law predicts that smaller nanodevices can admit more energy (e.g., chemical,
acoustic, electromagnetic) through their surfaces per unit enclosed volume of working nanomachinery, hence can have higher power densities, as illustrated by Eqn. 6.58.
Basic Capabilities • Power 173
human blood plasma (Appendix B), and rn ~ 0.5 micron, Ddiff =
1-7 x 1010 watts/m3
. However, because oxygen dissolves only slightly
in blood plasma and interstitial fluid, the oxyglucose engine is more
severely diffusion-limited by its oxygen requirements than by its
glucose requirements.* Applying Eqn. 6.58 and using (for oxygen)
D = 2.0 x 10-9 m2
/sec (Table 3.3), C = 7.3 x 1022 molecules/m3
 in
arterial blood plasma (Appendix B), Efuel ~ Eglu/6, and rn ~ 0.5 micron,
Ddiff = 7 x 108 watts/m3
. Once again, ~109 watts/m3 appears to be a
correct upper limit for whole nanorobots.**
The disposition of combustion byproducts, particularly CO2,
may provide another weak constraint on chemical systems. For example,
a 10-pW glucose-burning nanorobot generates ~107 molecules/sec
of CO2. Pressurized to 1000 atm, this production rate fills ~0.001
micron3
/sec of onboard storage space, assuming no venting. If CO2
is vented from a population of 1012 10-pW nanorobots uniformly
distributed throughout a ~0.1 m3 human body volume, then local
CO2 concentration rises by ~2 x 10-7 M/sec, reaching 0.0003 M
after 1 hour of continuous operation assuming no physiological
removal—still well below the normal ~0.001M blood plasma CO2
concentration.
By implication, these limits also drive the maximum number
density of nanodevices deployable in human tissue. For example, at
109 watts/m3 the hottest 1-micron nanorobot develops 1000 pW;
assuming a ~0.1 watt power budget when restricted to the thyroid
gland (Section 6.5.2), 100 million nanodevices may be deployed in
the gland giving a maximum number density of ~1013 nanorobots/
m3
. Nanorobot power consumption may range from ~0.1 pW for
simple respirocytes1400 (Chapter 22) up to ~10,000 pW or more
for the largest and most sophisticated repair and defensive in vivo
devices (Chapter 21), but the typical simple micron-scale nanorobot
may develop ~10 pW (roughly in line with biologically-derived
allometric scaling laws giving Dn ~ 107 watts/m3
) and thus could
safely achieve a number density of ~1015 nanorobots/m3
 (~10 micron
mean interdevice separation). Recall that the maximum diffusion-limited
total power draw for a population of oxygen-unrestricted
glucose-energized foraging nanorobots in cyto is ~70,000-300,000 pW
(Section 6.3.4.1).
Minimum powerplant size varies with requirements. Assuming
1012 watts/m3
 energy conversion for chemical (Section 6.3.4) or
electrical (Section 6.4.1) power transducers, then a 100 pW power
supply subsystem inside a working nanorobot may be as small as
(~50 nm)3
 in size.
Macroscale masses of working nanodevices may grow extremely
hot, placing major scaling limits on artificial nano-organs and other
large-scale nanomachinery aggregates (Chapter 14). As a somewhat
fanciful example, consider a macroscopic ball of radius R consisting
of N tightly-packed nanodevices each of mass density ρ and
whole-nanorobot power density Dp ~ 109 watts/m3
, of which
nanodevices some fraction fn are active, all suspended in mid-air.
The ball grows hotter as R (~N1/3) rises, until at some “critical
combustible mass” Mcrit = (4/3) π ρ Rcrit
3
 the surface temperature
exceeds the maximum combustion point for diamond in air (Tburn
= 1070 K)691 and the solid ball of nanorobots bursts into flame.
(Sapphire devices cannot burn, but have a Tmelt ~ 2310 K;1602 as a
practical matter, nanomachinery may fail at temperatures significantly
below Tburn.)
From simple geometry and neglecting ~2% air conduction losses,
the maximum noncombustible aggregate radius Rcrit is:

R ~
3 e T T
f D crit
r burn
4
environ
4
n p
σ − ( ) {Eqn. 6.59}
For er = 0.97 (e.g., carbon black) to maximize heat emission at
the lowest possible temperature and Tenviron = 300 K, then Rcrit =
0.22 mm for fn = 100%. Assuming a full cold start, critical time to
incineration is tcrit = CV (Tburn - Tenviron) / fn Dp = 1.4 sec for fn =
100% if nanorobot heat capacity CV = 1.8 x 106 joules/m3
-K
(~diamondoid). Decreasing Dp to a more reasonable 107
 watts/m3
or simply switching off 99% of the nanorobots (fn = 1%) increases
Rcrit to ~22 cm.
6.5.4 Selection of Principal Power Source
In selecting the ultimate source of power for a given application,
the appropriate energy acquisition strategy must first be decided.
Two overall strategies are readily distinguished: (1) nonrefuelable
and (2) refuelable.
A nonrefuelable strategy implies that all nanorobot power is
drawn from internal energy storage. Such a nanorobot simply stops
when its internal energy stores are depleted. The relevant parameter
is onboard energy storage density, which should be maximized. From
Section 6.2, chemical energy storage produces the highest energy
density, up to ~1011 joules/m3
. (Nuclear storage has a much higher
theoretical energy density, but in medically “safe” fissile systems the
rate of energy withdrawal from the store cannot be precisely regulated
using known technology, thus limiting the effective energy density
of this potential source.) A 1 micron3
 store of chemical energy at a
conservative 1010 joules/m3 powers a 10 pW nanorobot for ~103
sec, which may be sufficient in some applications.
A refuelable strategy implies that onboard energy stores serve
mainly as buffers, which are refilled periodically or continuously
from external chemical, sonic, electrical, or tethered sources. A
relevant parameter is now the rate of energy transfer, or environmental
power density, which should be maximized consistent with safety.
Again, at least two strategies can be distinguished: (2A) in vivo sources
and (2B) ex vivo sources. In vivo power sources may include free-flowing
chemical fuels (e.g., bloodstream glucose circulating once every 60
seconds represents ~2 x 105 watts/m3
), encapsulated chemical fuels,
or implanted dedicated energy organs. Ex vivo power sources may
include acoustic (2 x 104 watts/m3
), electromagnetic (2 x 103
watts/m3
), or tethered sources. For tethered sources, a safe properly
configured 1-meter tether 1 micron in diameter transfers hydraulic
energy at ~105 watts/m3 (at 1000 atm), fiberoptic photonic energy
at ~106 watts/m3
, electrical energy at ~107 watts/m3 (silver wire,
~107 amp/m2 at ~1 volt), chemical energy at ~108 watts/m3 (at 1000
atm), or mechanical energy up to ~1010 watts/m3
.
However, this is only the first step of the analysis because the
initial energy, once received, must be transduced into other useful
forms which may be used to drive onboard systems. Most nanorobot
designs will involve energy transduction chains of various lengths,
so the efficiency of the entire chain is also a relevant parameter driving
the choice of initial power source. Consider, for example, a nanorobot
requiring electrical power for some internal function. While the
maximum available electrical power density in the environment may
be comparatively low, the advantage of a much higher available
chemical power density may be offset by a relatively low direct
chemoelectric transduction efficiency (Section 6.3.4.5). On the other
hand, the relative efficiency of the chemoelectrical pathway may be
improved by using a glucose engine to generate mechanical motions,
which motions may then be converted to electrical energy via highly
efficient mechanoelectrical transduction (Section 6.3.2).
6.5.5 Electrical vs. Mechanical Systems
Because of the ubiquity of electrochemical processes in biological
systems, it is natural to assume that electrical power would be the
174 Nanomedicine • Volume I
energy of choice to drive nanomedical systems. However, it is clear
that mechanically powered nanorobots are competitive because
mechanical energy may be transmitted at very high efficiency over
nanoscale distances. Fully mechanical motors, pumps, actuators,
manipulators, and even computers have been designed.10
The principal disadvantages of electrically-powered nanorobots
include:
A. Bioelectric Interactions — Electrical systems can create stray
fields which may activate bioelectric-based molecular recognition
systems in biology. While electrical systems allow ready coupling
with electrochemical systems in the body, stray fields also may provoke
unintended electrokinetic interactions. For example, all galvanic sources
have been found to provoke a significant host reaction, including
formation of layers of necrotic debris, free neutrophils, granulation
tissue and complete fibrous connective tissue encapsulation of
long-term implants.590,3512 Microelectrophoretic interactions
with possible natural rf oscillations of cells683 could present additional
complications. Stray high-frequency vibrations from purely mechanical systems may be less provocative.
B. Electrical Interference — Electrical nanorobots are susceptible
to electrical interference from external sources such as rf or electric
fields, EMP pulses, and stray fields from other in vivo electrical
devices. (Digital cellular telephones have been reported
interfering with implanted cardiac pacemakers, causing the pacemakers to speed up, slow down, or even turn off.3495-3498) Cosmic
rays can provoke arc discharges in systems operated at high electrical
potential.
C. Thick Insulators — Very thick insulation is required to prevent
electron leakage, especially serious at the smallest sizes where
significant quantum mechanical tunneling can occur. Without careful
design, the high conductivity of the in vivo medium* can cause
sudden power loss, e.g., by “shorting out.”
D. Thick Wires — Relatively thick wires are needed to conduct
significant power levels without overheating, although future
room-temperature superconductors might reduce this
disadvantage.
The principal advantages of electrically-powered nanorobots include:
E. Speed of Operation — Electronic field configurations have a
velocity near the speed of light (c ~ 3 x 108 m/sec), much faster than
mechanical logic rods which may move as slow as 1 m/sec. Even the
classical electron drift speed vd in a bulk metallic conductor at high
current density Id may be faster than mechanical rod motions: vd =
Id / ne e, where ne = 8.4 x 1028 electrons/m3 for copper and e = 1.6
x 10-19 coul/electron, giving vd ~ 100 m/sec at Id ~ 1010 amps/m2
,
near the maximum current density. (A more typical Id ~ 106 amps/
m2 gives vd ~ 1 cm/sec.) And the mobility of an electron confined
to a one-dimensional wire or patterned diamondoid channel can be
much higher than in the bulk material, up to ~106 m/sec or
~0.3%c.1097,1098 Thus applications demanding the greatest speeds
may require electrical systems.
F. Electromagnetic Coupling — Detection of photons and electric/
magnetic fields is more easily mediated by an electrical transmission
device than a mechanical device. For instance, a photocell or rhodopsin
antenna absorbs photons to directly create moving charges. This is
probably more efficient than using a piezoelectric transducer backwards
as a detector, but involves handling higher-energy packets of energy
which is inherently riskier.
G. Transmission Attenuation — Electrical signals at sub-MHz
frequencies are only modestly attenuated during passage through
human tissue.
6.5.6 Power Analysis in Design
An important part of any nanodevice design exercise is a detailed
assessment of power requirements and heat dissipation. Such an
assessment might typically include the following elements:
A. Molecular Transport — Sorting rotors, internal transport
mechanisms, sieving or nanocentrifugation, and receptor-based
transport have specific power requirements (Chapter 3). Sorting
rotors operating at full speed (~105 rev/sec) dissipate ~1010 watts/
m3
. However, it should be possible to boost efficiency in some
continuous molecular exchange systems by recovering most of the
sorting energy by compressing (or concentrating) one species using
energy derived largely from the decompression (or deconcentration)
of the other via differential gearing.
B. Chemical Transformations — Drexler10 estimates that the
energy dissipation caused by chemical transformations involving
carbon-rich materials is ~1000 zJ/atom or ~108 joules/kg of final
product using readily-envisioned irreversible methods in systems
where low energy dissipation is not a design objective, but may in
theory be as low as ~1 zJ/atom or ~105 joules/kg “if one assumes the
development of a set of mechanochemical processes capable of transforming feedstock molecules into complex product structures using
only reliable, nearly reversible steps.” However, R. Merkle notes that
essentially all current proposals are quite dissipative. Most interactions
with biological molecules may also have relatively low energy densities
because common cut-and-repair operations can involve only a small
number of covalent bonds on a single macromolecule. For example,
forging just one new 1000-zJ covalent bond on a single 500-residue
protein molecule containing ~10,000 atoms has a net molecular
transformation cost of only ~0.1 zJ/atom. Transformations involving
noncovalent bonds can have even lower per-atom energy costs.
C. Mechanical Operations — As a crude rule, physically
active nanocomponents such as rotating roller bearings generate
~105 watts/m3 of waste heat; inactive parts produce no waste heat.
Larger mechanical assemblages such as nanomanipulator arms
dissipate ~109 watts/m3 in normal continuous operation,10 or ~1
megawatt/kg for active diamondoid nanomachinery. Energy required
for locomotion, actuation and manipulation is described in Chapter 9;
energy requirements for shape-changing or other metamorphic
activities must also be assessed (Chapter 5).
*The purest water (e.g., distilled and deionized) has a specific resistance of 2.5 x 105 ohm-m.390 It is normally difficult to obtain and store water with resistivity exceeding
~104 ohm-m because of the absorption of CO2 and other air gases, and of alkali and other electrolytes leached from glassware; ordinary distilled water in equilibrium with air
has resistivity ~1000 ohm-m.390 These values may be compared to 1.59 x 10-8 ohm-m for silver at 293 K,763 3.5 x 10-5 ohm-m for amorphous carbon at 293 K,1662 0.0893 ohm-m
for 1M KCl in water at 298 K and 68.1 ohm-m for 0.001M KCl solution390 (human blood is ~0.15M NaCl), 107
-108 ohm-m for synthesized diamond (depending on the growth
process used), and >1018 ohm-m dark resistivities in natural diamond.537
Basic Capabilities • Power 175
D. Communication and Navigation — There must be a design
assessment of the energy required, if any, for internal navigation
(Chapter 8) and for all communication tasks (Chapter 7)
including intradevice and interdevice signaling, inmessaging and
outmessaging, plus allocation of systemic overhead for
communications and navigational networks.
E. Computation — Mechanical nanocomputers using rod logic
in the design described by Drexler10 dissipate ~1012 watts/m3 at
~GHz clock rates, yielding ~1010 MIPS/watt or ~104 instructions/
sec per pW (~1028 instructions/sec-m3
). R. Merkle suggests that
the use of nearly reversible computational operations713 may reduce energy requirements per instruction by at least two orders of
magnitude, at the cost of a slower clock cycle. With standard logic,
dissipative irreversible operations can approach a minimum energy
dissipation of ln(2) kT ~ 3 zJ per operation at 310 K, and in principle
with reversible logic a computer can dissipate arbitrarily less energy
per logic operation (Section 10.2.4.1). Nevertheless, total
nanorobotic power demand will often be dominated by computational
energy requirements (Section 10.2).
F. Component Assembly — Fabricating nanoscale diamondoid
parts using hydrogen-rich organic feedstock molecules and oxygen generates energy, because the process involves a controlled, but
highly-exoergic, combustion reaction. In a well-known example
given by Drexler,10 “burning” hydrocarbon to make diamondoid
liberates 17 MJ/kg of gross energy, less 1.7 MJ/kg of local entropy
decrease in the reactants, giving ~15 MJ/kg of free energy;
assuming 3 MJ/kg dissipated in the mills, rotors, and computers
needed to drive the manufacturing process, a net output of 12 MJ/
kg of surplus energy is produced. However, subsequent higher-order
assembly processes using this diamondoid material are endoergic.
In the worst case, assembly of larger diamondoid structures from
1-nm cubes may cost ~9 MJ/kg, although with proper technique
most of this energy can be recovered as mechanical work, reducing
the cost of block assembly of larger structures to as low as ~0.5-1.0
MJ/kg.10 Leaving aside the initial exoergic energy production, then
depending upon computation, materials handling, and other requirements in a particular implementation, assembling prefabricated
diamondoid part-like or module-like components into larger
structures will probably cost ~1-3 MJ/kg of energy10(Chapter 19).
6.5.7 Global Hypsithermal Limit
Finally, it is possible to derive a limit to the total planetary active
nanorobot mass by considering the global energy balance. Total solar
insolation received at the Earth’s surface is ~1.75 x 1017 watts (IEarth
~ 1370 W/m2  0.4% at normal incidence887,1945). Global energy
consumption by mankind reached an estimated 1.2 x 1013 watts
(~0.02 W/m2
) in 1998. This latter figure may also be regarded as
the total heat dissipation of all human technological civilization
worldwide, as distinct from the ~1012 watt metabolic output of the
global human biomass. The evidence for global warming remains
controversial,887 but it is clear that as the waste heat from
human-built machinery continues to grow, the climate will begin
to change. Technological heat plumes from asphalt-covered major
cities already have demonstrable impact on local weather and thermal
patterns.
Leaving aside all considerations of changing concentrations of
various atmospheric components (e.g., CO2, H2O, O3), one might
ask at what point anthropogenic energy releases could begin to
seriously affect the global energy balance. (Climatologists sometimes
call this the “hypsithermal limit.”) Global warming data remain
inconclusive but certainly suggest that the present ~1013 watts may
lie within an order of magnitude of an important threshold. The
power dissipation of all terrestrial vegetation is ~1014 watts,* and it
is well-known that such vegetation plays a major role in the planetary
energy equation. Climatologists have speculated that an anthropogenic release of ~2 x 1015 watts (~1% solar insolation) might cause
the polar icecaps to melt. A high upper limit is provided by Venus,
which receives ~3.3 x 1017 watts at its cloudtops, producing a surface
temperature of ~700 K and a hellish ~100 atm sulfurous atmosphere—
despite its close geological and size similarity to Earth. As a fairly liberal
estimate,3100,3101 the maximum hypsithermal limit for Earth is taken
to be ~1015 watts.
The hypsithermal ecological limit in turn imposes a maximum power
limit on the entire future global mass of active nanomachinery or
“active nanomass.” Assuming the typical power density of active
nanorobots is ~107 W/m3
, the hypsithermal limit implies a natural
worldwide population limit of ~108
 m3 of active functioning nanorobots,
or ~1011 kg at normal densities. Assuming the worldwide human population stabilizes near ~1010 people in the 21st century and assuming a
uniform distribution of nanotechnology, the above population limit
would correspond to a per capita allocation of ~10 kg of active
continuously-functioning nanorobotry, or ~1016 active nanorobots per
person (assuming 1 micron3 nanorobots developing ~10 pW each, and
ignoring non-active devices held in inventory).** Whether a ~10-liter
per capita allocation (~100 KW/person) is sufficient for all medical,
manufacturing, transportation and other speculative purposes is a
matter of debate.
The hypsithermal active nanorobot population limit cannot be
defeated by heroic artifices of planetary engineering such as giant
Earth-orbiting sunscreens or planetary-scale heat pumps, which would
devastate global photosynthetic activity or climate while not significantly reducing thermal energy density at the Earth’s surface. Likewise, significantly reducing the atmospheric concentration of the most
important natural greenhouse gases, especially CO2 and H2O, on a
worldwide basis is not possible if the present ecology is to remain
essentially undisturbed, but even the complete elimination of such gases
would raise the hypsithermal limit by at most a factor of 10-20.
Specifically, if Earth had no atmosphere at all, then to maintain the
global mean surface temperature at its current value of TEarth ~ 288
K,3097 an additional nanorobogenic power of Pnoatm ~ π REarth2 (4 σ
TEarth
4 - IEarth) ~ 2 x 1016 watts could be released at the Earth’s surface,
where REarth = 6.37 x 106
 m (radius of Earth) and σ = 5.67 x 10-8 W/
m2
-K4 (Stefan-Boltzmann constant). Still more unrealistically, if Earth’s
surface were an atmosphere-free black body surrounded by a perfect
mirror (e.g., albedo = 1.00, vs. ~0.31 for natural Earth), an additional
nanorobogenic power release (underneath the mirrored barrier) of
Pmirror  4 π REarth2
 (σ TEarth
4 - Igeol) ~ 2 x 1017 watts would allow
maintenance of the current mean global surface temperature TEarth;
Igeol = 0.05 W/m2
,
3123 the mean geological heat flow at Earth’s surface
due to radioactive decay (e.g., U238, K40) in the crust. Reductions
in nanorobot waste heat made possible by low-dissipative molecular
manufacturing and reversible computing may be offset by popular
*Global photosynthetic fixation of CO2 by plants is ~3.85 x 1014 kg CO2/yr, ~46% by ocean flora;1720 CO2 fixation requires ~794 zJ/molecule (Eqn. 6.16) or ~1.1 x 107
 J/kg
CO2, giving a global vegetative total of ~1.4 x 1014 watts.
**Note that a global population limit of ~1026 10-pW nanorobots represents only ~100 moles of active devices; for 1000-pW devices (~109 W/m3 power density), the upper
population limit is only ~1 mole of 1-micron3
 active nanorobots worldwide. Facile talk of controlling localized “mole quantities” of nanodevices is thus highly misleading.
176 Nanomedicine • Volume I
insistence on adherence to a more conservative global limit, perhaps
~1013 watts (today’s level), to better preserve the terrestrial habitat.
Consistent with long-term ecological maintenance the hypsithermal
limit ultimately can only be avoided by continuing human technological progress in space, which seems an excellent idea in any case.
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 7
Communication
7.1 Nanorobot Communications Requirements
Communication is an important fundamental capability of
medical nanorobots. At the most basic level, nanomachines
must pass sensory and control data among internal subsystems
to ensure stable and correct device operation. They must also
exchange messages with biological cells, communicating with the
human body at the molecular level. Nanodevices must be able to
communicate with each other in order to:
1. coordinate complex, large-scale cooperative activities,
2. pass along relevant sensory, messaging, navigational, and other
operational data, and
3. monitor collective task progress.
Finally, nanorobots must be able to receive messages from, and transmit messages to, both the human patient and external entities
including antennas and telecommunications links, laboratory or
bedside computers, and attending medical personnel.
It is instructive first to examine the gross information flows likely
to be required in typical nanomedical situations. Nanorobot onboard
computers are likely to generate from I ~ 104 bits/sec for the simplest
systems to ~109 bits/sec for the most complex systems and tasks
(Chapter 12), which sets broad limits on internal communications
requirements. Assuming onboard data storage of 105
-109 bits,
rewriting an entire nanorobot memory in ~1 second demands
information flows of 105
-109 bits/sec. Communications with
human cells may take place at many levels, ranging from 10-1000
bits/sec for individual neuronal impulses (Section 4.8.6) up to brief
bursts at ~106 bits/sec (~MHz frequencies) for intracellular processes
involving enzyme action or molecular gating. Inter-nanorobot communications are unlikely to require data transfer rates exceeding
103
-106 bits/sec; explicit exchanges between nanodevices and the
human user are restricted by the maximum data processing rate of
the conscious mind, variously estimated as 1-1000 bits/sec (Chapter
25), although dermal and retinal displays may transfer visual
information to the patient at up to ~107 bits/sec (Section 7.4.6).
Communications with external entities may include monitoring
or data transfer operations. For example, the ~525 x 390 =
204,750 pixel/frame of standard halftone black-and-white broadcast television transmitted at 30 frames/sec with ~1 bit/pixel
mandates a ~6.1 x 106 bit/sec (6.1 MHz) digital transfer rate (~6.1
MHz transmission bandwidth)*; downloading an entire uncompressed
human genome during cytogenetic repair operations (Chapter 20)
in ~1000 sec requires a ~107
 bits/sec transfer rate.
According to classical information theory for channel capacity
on a dissipative transmission line with additive equilibrium thermal
noise,699 the minimum erasure energy required per transmitted bit
is
Ebit ≥ kT ln(2) = 3 zJ/bit {Eqn. 7.1}
where k = 0.01381 zJ/K (Boltzmann constant), T = 310 K, and 1
zeptojoule (zJ) = 10-21 joule. Thus the maximum Imax ~ 109 bits/sec
bandwidth requirement noted earlier must draw 3 picowatts (pW),
well within the anticipated 1-1000 pW power budget of typical in vivo
medical nanodevices (Section 6.5.3). Slower bit rates can draw even
less power. The design challenge is to closely approach this minimum
theoretical limit.**
In this Chapter, an analysis of the most common nanorobotic
communication modalities (Section 7.2) and communication network
architectures (Section 7.3) is followed by a brief discussion of the
many specific communication tasks to be performed (Section 7.4).
7.2 Communication Modalities
As a general principle, any method by which materials or power
can be transferred into, around, or out of the human body also may
be employed as a mode of communication by imposing a
time-varying modulation on the flow. For in vivo communications,
the leading candidates are free-tissue chemical, acoustic, and electromagnetic broadcast, nanomechanical and cable systems, and dedicated
communicytes. An extensive treatment of data protocol systems,1652
such as TCP/IP or any layered communication protocol, as they
might apply to medical nanorobotic systems, would be interesting
but is beyond the scope of this Volume.
7.2.1 Chemical Broadcast Communication
Chemical broadcast communication is widely used in the
human body, as for example, in cellular communications using cytokines
and other mechanisms (Section 7.4.5), hormones, neuropeptides,
immune system components and pheromones. Consider the simple
case of in vivo nanorobots attempting to communicate with each
* Although treated as approximately equal for simplicity in this book, the digital transfer rate is distinct from the transmission bandwidth. The bandwidth needed to handle
a specific transfer rate is related to the actual coding and modulation technique selected. The simplest modulation techniques can indeed approach ~1 bit/sec per Hz of
bandwidth, but much more efficient techniques are available. For instance, a typical 1998-vintage PC modem used complex coding and modulation schemes to transmit 33
KB/sec over a voice-grade transmission line that was only 4 KHz wide, thus achieving a transfer rate of ~8 bits/sec per Hz of bandwidth; ~100:1 data compression algorithms
are currently available for voice transmissions.
** Landauer700 points out that in theory there is no minimum energy required to transfer a bit; but see also Levitin2318 and the discussion of reversible computing in Section
10.2.4.1.
178 Nanomedicine • Volume I
other exclusively by chemical means. In this model, the sender
releases a coded messenger molecule of some type into the cytosol,
interstitial fluid, or bloodstream, and this molecule travels via
diffusion and convective transport to its intended recipient, whereupon
the messenger molecule is recognized, absorbed and decoded.
7.2.1.1 Ideal Messenger Molecule
The ideal chemical messenger molecule will have several important
characteristics. First, its structure will contain a distinctive “head”
or “flag” that permits easy recognition and binding by nanorobot
molecular receptor systems such as molecular pumps or sorting
rotors (Section 3.4), so that the entire message need not be read in
order to identify the intended recipient. Second, it will be relatively
bioinactive, thus not readily broken down by natural processes
before the message is likely to be received. Third, it should be easily
eliminated from the body, thus preventing potentially toxic
accumulations; however, the molecule and any likely breakdown
products should also be inherently nontoxic in anticipated maximum
concentrations.* Finally, the molecule should be capable of easy
extension to larger sizes, permitting significant entire messages to
be written on the molecule, as the statistical nature of the transport
process implies a relatively long time between assured detections of
the messenger molecule.
One possible candidate messenger is the partially fluorinated
polyethylene molecule originally suggested by Drexler 10 for
nanocomputer tape bulk memory systems, although others have
been investigated.1200 Such molecules can store one bit per carbon
atom using an H atom to represent a “0” and an F atom to represent a
“1” on one side of the carbon-chain backbone, with all H atoms
occupying the other side of the backbone to facilitate easy reading.
The message may be a single linear chain or may include branching
structures representing conditionals or prioritizations embedded in
the message. Assuming molecules (averaging 50%/50% H/F atoms
on the read side) are of the form CH3(CHX)nCH3 (with X = H or
F atoms) and can store 1 bit per unit (with n units/molecule), then
message molecule density rmessage ~ 1000 kg/m3 and message molecule
volume Vmessage ~ (3.82 x 10-29)n (meter3
), giving an information
density of Dmessage ~ 26 bits/nm3 (~3 bits/nm of linear message
molecule length). (By comparison, linear DNA achieves ~1 bit/nm3
.)
Message molecule molecular weight MWmessage ~ n MWunit (kg/mole)
for n >> 1, where MWunit = 0.023 kg/mole for (CHX), ignoring the
end caps and again assuming 50%/50% H/F atoms.
Hydrofluorocarbon message molecules with n > 20 may be
strategically crosslinked in a standardized pattern across the all-H
backbone and folded into a maximally compact spheroidal configuration in preparation for transmission. Alternatively, the polymer could
be wound up onto a bobbin or reel, allowing more convenient reading
and a high packing density.10 The read-write mechanism may
require ~104 nm3 of nanomachinery, providing a readout rate of
Iread ~ 109 bits/sec by scanning the message molecule at a ~30 cm/
sec read rate,10 although the complete tape-handling mechanism may
require up to 105 nm3 of nanomachinery. Two-dimensional
information-bearing fluorinated hydrocarbon molecules have also
been considered.2182
Are hydrofluorocarbon molecules biocompatible? Fluorinated
hydrocarbon perfusants with n < 20 such as Fluosol-DA or the
commercial solvent polyfluoro-octobromide (Perflubron) are
FDA-approved and have been used as reversible oxygen carriers in
artificial blood formulations for years.704,705 Such fluorocarbons are
characterized by high chemical and biochemical inertness, absence
of metabolism, and rapid excretion.704 The rate of excretion has
been shown to decrease exponentially with increasing molecular
weight, with the exception of fluorocarbons containing a lipophilic
substituent such as Br (e.g., Perflubron) or a hydrogenated fragment in
their molecular structure.704 These water-insoluble compounds
usually consist of 8-10 carbon atoms with molecular weights of
~450-500 daltons; clinical administrations typically reach maximum
bloodstream concentrations of 70-400 gm/liter.705 (cf. LD50 ~ 700
gm/liter estimated from acute single-dose toxicity studies707), many
orders of magnitude in excess of the levels anticipated for nanodevice
chemical communication applications. Interestingly, mice survive
immersion in fluorocarbon through which oxygen is bubbled,2183
and rats breathing 95% oxygen have survived total blood replacement
with fluorocarbon fluid.2184 The boiling point of perfluoropentane
(C5F12) is 29.2˚C, but is >37˚C for n>5—e.g., 56.6˚C for
perfluorohexane (C6F14).
Fluorocarbons and fluorocarbon moieties have very strong
intramolecular bonds and very weak intermolecular interactions,2940
hence should display low particle aggregation. Fluorinated surfactants
are less hemolytic and less detergent than their hydrocarbon counterparts,2940 and fluorosurfactants appear unable to extract membrane
proteins.2940The stability and permeability of fluorinated liposomes
has been widely studied.2941-2944 For example, anionic double chain
glycophospholipids with either two hydrocarbon or two
perfluorocarbon chains, or a mixed double chain (one fluorinated,
one hydrogenated), readily give vesicles 30-70 nm in diameter when
dispersed in water, with maximum tolerated IV doses up to 0.5 gm/
kg body weight in mice (~5 gm/liter blood volume); hemolytic
activity sharply decreases with increasing degree of fluorination.2943
Many fluorinated surfaces such as Teflon are simultaneously hydrophobic and lipophobic.2940
Fluorocarbons are typically administered in the form of emulsions
of 0.1-0.2 micron droplets dispersed in a physiologic solution, similar
to fat emulsions routinely used for parenteral nutrition. A compact
folded messenger molecule of spherical radius rmessage can store
approximately

I 4
3
r D (bits) essage message
3
m = π message {Eqn 7.2}
and may display Isurface ~ (3 π1/2 Imessage/4)2/3~1.2 Imessage
2/3 (bits)
on a compact spherical packet surface. For rmessage = 0.2 micron,
Imessage ~ 109 bits/molecule (e.g., “genome packets”) with Isurface
~ 106 bits. Of this number, at most ~1000 bits may be required
for recipient identification, time stamping, “destroy by” dating, or
other message packet flagging or header information. For the (CHX)n
core fragment, Imessage = n (bits).
Hydrofluorocarbon messenger molecules will not be readily
metabolized. The smaller molecules are cleared rapidly from the
circulation with brief retention in the mononuclear phagocyte system,706
mainly in the liver, spleen and bone marrow. They are then reintroduced into the circulation by lipid carriers in the blood at a rate that
appears to depend on the fluorocarbon’s solubility in fat, with some
concentration in adipose tissues. Eventually, they are excreted through
the lungs with the expired air709 as a vapor (for short message segments
of low molecular weight), with an intravascular persistence of 4-12
hours for present oxygen-carrying emulsions.704 (Linear mixed
* M. Krummenacker notes that if a common standard format is established for design economy, then any stray messenger molecules that are released intact into the environment
could trigger unwanted action in other bodies, and at inappropriate times, if inhaled or ingested by someone other than the original patient. Such “information toxicity” can
be reduced by judicious degradation and deflagging of all messenger molecules prior to final excretion, by recycling, and by employing validity-checking security protocols
(Chapter 12) before permitting any action to be stimulated or influenced by received messenger molecules.
Basic Capabilities • Communication 179
fluorocarbon-hydrocarbon amphiphiles have demonstrated at least
some bloodstream persistence in vivo of up to 4 months.712) Massive
single doses or repeated administration can cause saturation and
transient blockade of the reticuloendothelial system (RES), temporarily
depressing this component of the host-defense system.710
Message-carrying fluorocarbons should be extremely inert, although
there is some evidence that macrophages which have ingested
perfluorocompounds show loss of phagocytic function and possible
release of cytokines and other immune mediators.708 Fluosol has
been found to elicit anaphylactoid-type reactions is a small percentage
of patients at blood concentrations as low as ~0.1 gm/liter.711
Irregular Teflon (CF2)n granules measuring 4-100 microns (equivalent
to n = 106
-1010) employed clinically in periurethral injection 944 have
produced granulomatous reaction, embolization, and migration to the
lungs.945-946 This implies a maximum size limit on large
naked messenger molecules and a possible requirement for
encapsulation in a biocompatible shell prior to release. R. Bradbury
suggests that such a shell might include a lipid membrane with
“docking tags” similar to viral attachment proteins. These tags
should be engineered to be incapable of binding by antibodies,
to have minimal affinity for common cell receptors, and to be
indigestible by the regular cellular protein breakdown and recycling
machinery (and thus be incapable of generating long-term immunity).
A hydrofluorocarbon messenger molecule with a lengthy stretch
of exposed hydrogens might display increased toxicity, as some
short-chain linear paraffin hydrocarbons (CnH2n+2) are considered
“poisonous”2945 with an official NFPA Health Hazard Rating of 1
or “slightly toxic” (scale 0-4).2947 Animal toxicity of pure propane
(C3H8) occurs with inhalation exposures to concentrations >10%
and includes mild respiratory tract irritation and irregular respiration,
cardiac sensitization to catecholamine-induced arrhythmias, analgesia
and hypotension,2947,2948 although the principal risk is simple
asphyxia and cold burn during bulk exposures. Typical OSHA
workplace air exposure concentration limits for propane and
butane are 0.06%-0.1%.2946,2947 Inhalation toxicity to
pentafluoroethane (C2F5H) in rats is 70.9% (4-hour ALC), with
no significant toxicological effects under <5% concentration.2948
Toxicity mechanisms may differ for short-chain and long-chain
hydrocarbon molecules.
This entire area deserves an in-depth toxicology study. If
long-term toxicity is found to be unacceptable, the solution may be
to engineer “digestible” but non-immunogenic packages, reducing
bit density but increasing the available molecular pool of raw materials
for building messenger molecules in vivo. As a possible alternative
to hydrofluorocarbons, R. Bradbury suggests using unusual protein
or polysaccharide chains (which can compactly encode large
quantities of data; Section 8.5.2.2)3122 that are easily read by
nanorobots but also are easily digestible by cells as “food.” If patient
immunotype is known, then protein sequences can be designed
which cannot be bound by MHC molecules (Section 8.5.2.1), preventing the patient from developing an immunity to them, and which
look like self-shapes or are nonbinding to antibodies.
7.2.1.2 Diffusion-Limited Broadcast Rate
Given Imessage ~ 109 bits for rmessage = 0.2 micron from Eqn. 7.2,
it is clear that onboard stores of messenger molecules will be quickly
exhausted at the highest broadcast bit rates unless the communication
system architecture makes substantial use of messenger molecule
recycling. Without recycling, emission of hydrofluorocarbon message
molecules is fluorine-limited, because carbon and hydrogen atoms
are readily available from glucose and water molecules. The bloodstream concentration of fluoride is ~4.5 x 10-7 gm/cm3 (Appendix
B) or ~1.4 x 1022 F atoms/m3
. From Eqn. 3.4, the maximum diffusion
current to the entire surface of a spherical nanodevice of radius
R = 1micron and diffusion constant D ~ 2 x 10-9 m2
/sec (est. from
Table 3.3) is J = 3.6 x 108 F atoms/sec or 1.1 x 10-17 kg/sec, enough
fluorine to manufacture 2.7 x 10-17 kg/sec representing a continuous
long-term maximum broadcast rate of I ~ 7.2 x 108 bits/sec of
(CHX)n 1-bit/unit hydrofluorocarbon messenger molecules.
Even in the unlikely event that all 8.3 x 1022 atoms of fluorine
present in the human body (Table 3.1) were somehow converted to
hydrofluorocarbon messenger molecules and released into the bloodstream simultaneously, the bloodstream concentration would reach
~1.2 gm/liter, well below the ~700 gm/liter LD50, though admittedly
exceeding the ~0.1 gm/liter limit that occasionally triggers
anaphylactoid-type reactions.
In 1963, Bossert and Wilson703 completed the first systematic
analysis of chemical communication in the context of animal
olfactory communication in air, later extended by Bossert725 in an
analysis of maximum possible bit rates. In the following discussion,
their results are adapted to the problem of in vivo chemical communication among medical nanodevices.
7.2.1.3 Instantaneous Stationary Source in Stationary Medium
Consider a chemomessaging nanorobot that releases Qmessage
messenger molecules (each carrying Imessage bits/molecule) in a single
puff as a point source at time t = 0. This is the ideal design for an
alarm-type message or for messages requiring rapid fade-out. For
simplicity, the human body is taken to be a continuous, isotropic,
unbounded, stationary aqueous medium; a more detailed treatment
is beyond the scope of this book. The spatial density of message
molecules as a function of time t and distance r from the point
source is

U Q
(4 D t) message e (molecules/m ) message
3/2
r
4 D t 3
2
= −
π
{Eqn. 7.3}
where D = the translational diffusion coefficient for message molecules,
which are assumed to be roughly spherically packed, estimated from
Eqns. 3.5 and 7.2 as

D kT D
162 I
message
2
message
= 

 







 η π
{Eqn. 7.4}
For Imessage = 100 bits, D = 2.2 x 10-11 m2
/sec; for Imessage = 109 bits,
D ~ 1.0 x 10-13 m2
/sec. Because the detection of molecules by
receptor-based chemical sensors requires a concentration-dependent
minimum sensor cycle time tEQ approximated by Eqn. 4.3, then
there exists some minimum threshold concentration (cmin) of message
molecules that can be detected by a chemical sensor in some
minimum waiting time tsensor = tEQ, given by

c N
r t
I MW
4 kT N min encounters
message
2
sensor
message unit
A
1/2
=











 π
{Eqn. 7.5}
For Nencounters ~ 100,10 NA = 6.023 x 1023 molecules/mole (Avogadro’s
number), rmessage from Eqn. 7.2 and taking tsensor = 1 sec, then cmin ~ 1
x 10-9 molecules/nm3 for Imessage = 100 bits and cmin ~ 9 x 10-11
molecules/nm3 for Imessage = 109 bits. The concentration of message
molecules exceeds cmin within an expanding diffusive sphere. In a time
trec = (0.0293 / D) (Qmessage / cmin)
2/3 this expanding sphere reaches a
180 Nanomedicine • Volume I
maximum size Rmax = (0.419) (Qmessage / cmin)
1/3, after which it begins
to contract as the puff dissipates;703 the concentration eventually
falls below cmin everywhere at tfadeout = e trec, where e = 2.718...
1012 nanorobots uniformly distributed throughout a 0.1 m3
human body have a mean interdevice separation of ~50 microns.
For simple messages (Imessage = 100 bits) and Rmax = 50 microns,
then Qmessage ~ 2 x 106 message molecules emitted, trec ~ 20 sec
(I ~ 5 bits/sec), and tfadeout ~ 50 sec. If Rmax = 1 mm, then Qmessage
= 2 x 1010 molecules and trec ~ 8000 sec to receive the signal (I ~ 0.01
bits/sec). For complex messages (Imessage = 109
 bits), Qmessage ~ 1 x 105
molecules but trec ~ 4000 sec (~1 hour) for the message to be transported Rmax = 50 microns (I ~ 3 x 105
 bits/sec).
A simple alarm signal (Imessage = 100 bits) released within an
individual tissue cell is received everywhere throughout the cytosol—
an assumed ~(20 micron)3 cell volume—in trec ~ 0.8 sec (I ~ 100
bits/sec) with tfadeout ~ 2 sec, using a single alarm puff of Qmessage ~
17,000 message molecules (computed with Rmax ~ 10 microns)
which molecules may be stored in a (40 nm)3 volume per puff. As a
practical matter, the cytosol is quite crowded with macromolecules
and cytoskeletal components (Section 8.5.3); exclusion effects will
increase diffusion times by as yet unknown amounts, to be determined
experimentally.
7.2.1.4 Instantaneous Stationary Source in Flooded Tube
For a source at the end of a long water-filled tube with nonabsorbent walls, cross-sectional area Atube, and length Xmax = (0.484)
Qmessage / Atube cmin, then trec = (0.117 / D) (Qmessage / Atube cmin)
2
and tfadeout = e trec ,
703 using cmin from Eqn. 7.5. Hence a simple
message (Imessage = 100 bits) passing through a tube of area Atube = 1
micron2 and length Xmax = 50 microns requires Qmessage = 130 message
molecules and is received in trec ~ 60 sec (I ~ 2 bits/sec).
7.2.1.5 Continuous Stationary Source in Stationary Medium
Consider a source of message molecules emitting continuously
at the constant rate Qmessage (message molecules/sec) into the idealized
stationary medium described in Section 7.2.1.3. Such a source might
be useful for status telemetry, navigational beacons, or periodic
sampling monitors. If the source continues for a long time then
the detectable threshold concentration sphere703 of message molecules
around the point source asymptotically approaches a maximum
radius Rmax = Qmessage / (4 π D cmin). The time for the expanding
detectable concentration sphere to reach a radius R = fR Rmax (where
0  fR 1 is the fractional radial expansion of the message sphere),
the exact solution for which involves the complementary error
function, is approximated reasonably well by trec ~ (1.1 fR Qmessage /
8 π cmin (1-fR) D3/2)
2
 for 0.1 < fR  1, using D from Eqn. 7.4 and
cmin from Eqn. 7.5. Thus for simple messages (Imessage = 100 bits)
with Rmax = 100 microns and R = 50 microns (fR = 0.5), then Qmessage
~ 4 x 104 message molecules emitted per second and trec ~ 140 sec
(I ~ 1 bit/sec). For complex messages (Imessage = 109 bits), Qmessage
~ 10 message molecules emitted per second and trec ~ 8.4 hours (I ~
3 x 104
 bits/sec).
7.2.1.6 Continuous Mobile Source in Stationary Medium
Consider a mobile nanorobot traveling through a stationary
aqueous medium at velocity vn (m/sec), emitting message molecules
continuously at the rate of Qmessage (molecules/sec). The
cigar-shaped molecular trail envelope has a maximum length
Xfadeout = Qmessage / 4 π D cmin, and at a distance Xmax = Xfadeout / e
behind the moving source the message molecules diffuse outward to a
maximum detectable radius Rmax = (0.342) (Qmessage / vn cmin)
1/2 as
measured from the motion axis; for distances >Xmax the
radius of the detectable message molecule envelope declines to
zero at Xfadeout, with tfadeout = Xfadeout / vn. Thus, a nanorobot velocity vn = 10 microns/sec and an Xfadeout = 1000 microns requires
Qmessage = 4 x 105 molecules/sec for simple message molecules (Imessage
= 100 bits) giving Rmax ~ 60 microns at Xmax = 370 microns and
tfadeout = 100 sec.
These equations703 also apply to a continuous stationary source
in a nonstationary medium, where the medium moves past the source
with a slow, constant velocity with perfect laminar nonturbulent
flow in the absence of nearby boundary surfaces, an idealized
instance of the case described in Section 7.2.1.7.
7.2.1.7 Continuous Stationary Source in Nonstationary Medium
A nonstationary transporting medium does more than just move
message molecules in the direction of flow—it also may create
turbulence in the medium, adding a component of turbulent
diffusivity that overwhelms simple Brownian diffusion, giving a total
diffusivity that is more a property of the flow structure of the
medium and the boundary surfaces than of the substance of the
medium, a complex analytical problem. Consider a continuous point
source emitting a constant Qmessage (molecules/sec) from a fixed
position near the luminal surface of a blood vessel of radius Rvasc.
From the relations given in703 and as a crude approximation assuming
plume width << boundary wall separation, Qmessage ~ (0.0396) vvasc
cminXfadeout
7/4 to create an ellipsoidal message molecule plume of
maximum detectable length Xfadeout in a medium flowing along the
x-axis with fluid velocity vvasc. The widest part of the plume occurs
at Xmax ~ (3.57) F4/7, Ymax ~ (0.686) F1/2, and Zmax ~ (0.341) F1/2,
where F = Qmessage / vvasc cmin. Message receipt time trec ~ Xfadeout /
vvasc.
Thus a simple message (Imessage = 100 bits, cmin ~ 10-9 molecules/
nm3 for tsensor = 1 sec) broadcast from the luminal surface of the
common carotid artery (vvasc ~ 0.2 m/sec, Rvasc ~ 3 mm; Table 8.2)
with a desired plume length Xfadeout = 100 microns requires at least
Qmessage ~ 109 molecules/sec, producing a very narrow plume with
Ymax ~ 40 microns, Zmax ~ 20 microns (the radial direction), and trec
~ 0.5 millisec (I ~ 100 bits/sec, limited by tsensor = 1 sec). For a
complex message (Imessage = 109 bits, cmin ~ 9 x 10-11 molecules/nm3 for
tsensor = 1 sec), Qmessage ~ 7 x 107 molecules/sec at trec ~ 0.5 millisec
(I ~ 109
 bits/sec, limited by tsensor = 1 sec).
7.2.1.8 Assessment of Chemical Broadcast Messaging
Chemical broadcast messaging in theory permits information
transfers up to 109 bits/sec but appears to be extremely
energy-inefficient. The assembly of (CHX)n messenger molecule
units may require 1-1000 zJ/bit (Section 6.5.6 (B)). For instance,
replacing C-H (642 zJ) with C-F (876 zJ) costs ~234 zJ, but
recycling CH3F molecules into C-CH2F chains actually produces
97 zJ of energy. A feedstock of CH3F and CH4 will release energy
when the tape is first assembled, but will cost energy to tear apart
into its fundamental subunits. R. Bradbury believes that the net
cost of tape production and recycling can be reduced to 10-50 zJ/bit,
given sufficient space to store lots of tape subunits: “If the
assembly process is efficient at harvesting the energy produced, and
the molecules don’t get lost to cellular recycling machinery, then
you could produce a system with very high overall efficiency, though
you will have to worry about distribution of harvested energy and
feedstock.”
However, since ~106 molecules must be released to ensure
receipt of at least one message molecule by an intended recipient
~50 microns away (e.g., Section 7.2.1.3), the energy cost per
received bit rises sharply to ~106
-109 zJ/bit, which is >> 3 zJ/bit, the
Basic Capabilities • Communication 181
theoretical minimum (Eqn. 7.1). Thus a 1-pW communications power
budget limits steady-state bandwidth to ~1 bit/sec across ~50-micron
transmission ranges. Additional disadvantages of chemical communications are slowness of transmission (except in nonstationary
media or across short distances) and the ability to be delayed or
blocked by semipermeable or impermeable barriers, or by absorptive
nanorobotic agents active in the environment. Noise on chemical
channels may almost be eliminated by using artificial messenger
molecules, reducing the natural background nearly to zero, though noise
may still be present due to the presence of old signals, interference or
cross-talk from other man-made devices, or even from intentional
medical or military jamming. The encoding mechanism of “genome
packets” would act less like email, and more like FTP, because the
amount of information transferred per messenger molecule is so
large.1652 Finally, used messenger molecules must be degraded by
nanomachines (or other means) after the “destroy by” date has been
passed; the number of messenger molecules to be captured and
degraded or recycled by the messaging nanorobot population must
approximate the number of messenger molecules released.
Nanorobot-to-nanorobot chemical broadcasts may be useful
in the case of nanorobots working in close quarters where low
emission rates will suffice, as in bacterial quorum sensing.3236
For example, achieving the minimum detectable concentration
cmin ~ 10-9 molecules/nm3 for 100-bit message molecules inside
a (20 micron)3 human tissue cell requires emission of only ~104
molecules (Section 7.2.1.3), costing ~1 pJ to manufacture and
representing just 10-7 % of tissue cell volume. Chemical communications may also be useful in various special applications
such as “silent alarms” using premanufactured messenger molecules
vented from onboard storage tanks, thus moving the manufacturing
energy cost ex vivo. Assuming 0.1 micron3 tankage per nanorobot, each
device may store ~108 100-bit message molecules available for ready
release, enough to signal ~104 in cyto alarm events. Each such alarm
signal may permeate the entire cytosol in ~1 sec.
Chemical broadcast messaging may be most useful when the high
energy cost of creating the message molecules is borne by some
external or macroscale agency, thereby requiring individual
nanorobots only to receive the chemical signal but not to send it.
For example, messenger molecules manufactured in the laboratory,
treatment clinic, or implanted dedicated communication organ
(Section 7.3.4) may be injected into the bloodstream in sufficient
concentration to ensure receipt. Given cmin ~ 1 x 10-9 molecules/
nm3 (Imessage = 100 bits/molecule) or cmin ~ 9 x 10-11 molecules/nm3
(Imessage = 109 bits/molecule), the minimum number of messenger
molecules needed to promptly raise the entire bloodstream concentration to cmin (assuming no absorption by the body) is >7 x 1015
100-bit messenger molecules (a ~0.006 mm3 injection) or >5 x 1014
109
-bit messenger molecules (a 4 cm3 injection producing ~0.9 gm/
liter concentration, somewhat exceeding the ~0.1 gm/liter threshold
that occasionally produces anaphylactoid-type reactions). By
comparison, a single nanorobot with a 1 pW power budget can only
manufacture ~104
-107
 100-bit message molecules/sec.
In 1998, chemical messaging was only starting to be applied in
robotics. For example, in one experiment simple pheromone-guided
macroscale mobile robots could follow a scent plume using silkworm moth antennae wired into an electronic neural network.2163
7.2.2 Acoustic Broadcast Communication
Communication by acoustic waves is a highly useful channel for
information transfer in nanomedicine. Previous Chapters have
described the reception of acoustic energy in sensing (Sections 4.5,
4.8.2 and 4.9.1) and in the transfer of power (Sections 6.3.3, 6.4.1
and 6.4.3.3). Issues remaining to be addressed here include the
generation of ultrasonic radiation by nanorobots (Section 7.2.2.1)
and free-tissue acoustic channel bandwidths available in the human
body (Section 7.2.2.2). Acoustic cables and transmission lines are
treated in Section 7.2.5.3.
7.2.2.1 Acoustic Radiators
The acoustic power generated by any vibrating source is Pout =
U2
 RA (RMS watts), where U is the rate of oscillatory volume
displacement of the fluid, measured in RMS m3
/sec, and RA is the
acoustic radiation resistance seen by the source, measured in MKS
acoustic ohms.889 Two basic generators are the vibrating piston and
the pulsating sphere, both of radius r. From Stokes Law (Eqn. 9.73)
the input power required to propel a circular piston through water
at velocity v is Pin ~ 6 π r η v2
, or Pin ~ 24 π r η v2 for a radially
oscillating sphere. Hence U = π r2 v = (π r3
 Pin / 6 η)
1/2 for a vibrating
piston to which Pin watts of mechanical input power are delivered,
and U = (2 π r3
 Pin / 3 η)
1/2 for the pulsating sphere.
The radiation resistance RA = π ρ ν2 / kr vsound, where kr = 2
(piston) or 4 (sphere) and ν is acoustic frequency (Hz). This equation is
valid only when r/λ << 1 (e.g., radiator size is very small in comparison
to acoustic wavelength λ = vsound / ν); for r = 1 micron and ν = 1
MHz, then r/λ ~ 0.001 in water. Sound energy generated from a
source with dimensions small compared with the wavelength of the
vibration in the medium produces an intensity uniform in all angular
directions; such a generator is considered to be a point source.
Formulas for radiators having r/λ >> 1 are also provided by Massa.889
Combining these results with Eqn. 4.53, transmitted acoustic
pressure (Ap), output power (Pout), and power intensity (Ip) at the
radiator surface are given by

A r P
3 k (N/m ) p
2 2
in
r
1/2
2 = 





π ρ ν
η
{Eqn. 7.6}

P k r P
24 v (watts) out r
2 23
in
sound
= π ρ ν
η
{Eqn. 7.7}

I 4 P
k r (watts/m ) p out
r
2 2
2 = π
{Eqn. 7.8}
For example, a vibrating piston radiator of radius r = 1 micron and
input power Pin = 10 pW operating at ν = 1 MHz in vivo produces
Ap = 0.0007 atm radiation pressure, Pout = 0.005 pW (giving e% =
Pout / Pin = 0.0005 (0.05%) and an acoustic intensity of Ip = 0.002
watts/m2
 at the surface of the radiator, assuming ρ = 993.4 kg/m3
,
η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec and vsound ~ 1500 m/sec for human interstitial
fluid at 310 K. Figure 7.1 summarizes Eqn. 7.6 for various parameter
choices.
7.2.2.2 Free-Tissue Acoustic Channel Capacity
Figure 7.1 (with blood pressure variations compared; Section
4.9.1.2) and Eqn. 7.7 illustrate the well-known result in acoustics
that for a given driving amplitude, micropistons and microspheres
are more powerful sound radiators at higher frequencies. That is,
input power (driving the radiator) is more efficiently transduced
into output power (waves in the medium) both at higher frequencies
and at larger radiator sizes. Thus to achieve the highest acoustic
channel capacity per unit of input power, the highest practical frequency
and the largest possible radiator should be used for
nanorobot-to-nanorobot acoustic communications. Of course, at
higher frequencies, attenuation becomes more severe and eventually
limits the value of ever higher frequencies.
182 Nanomedicine • Volume I
An acoustic sensor of radius r located a distance Xpath from a
transmitter of like size must receive at least kT eSNR ~ 30 zJ within
a ν-1 (sec) integration time in order to receive information at frequency
ν (bits/sec) for SNR = 2 (Section 4.5.1). If acoustic energy conversion
efficiency e% = Pout/Pin (Eqn. 7.7), receiver duty cycle is fduty, and
acoustic attenuation in the medium is given by Eqns. 4.52 and 4.53
with αtiss = 8.3 x 10-6 sec/m for soft tissue (Table 4.2), then to satisfy
the above criterion requires that

P
f
e% kT e
X
r e (watts) in
duty SNR path
2
2
2 X tiss path = 




 ( ) 





ν α ν
{Eqn. 7.9}
For fduty = 10%, r = 1 micron, Xpath = 100 microns, taking ν = 10
MHz gives e% ~ 0.05 (5%), Pin ~ 6000 pW continuous, and I ~
106 bits/sec. Increasing ν to 100 MHz improves e% to at least ~50%
and I = fduty ν ~ 107 bits/sec without increasing Pin, giving a maximum
safe acoustic power intensity of ~e% Pin / π r2 ~ 1000 watts/m2
(Section 6.4.1) at the transmitter surface. Further increases in ν
cause I to decline, because e% cannot improve beyond a maximum
of 100%.
These results imply that nanorobot-to-nanorobot acoustic
communications will generally take place at ~10-100 MHz frequencies
over 10-100 micron path lengths in vivo. Acoustic messaging over
longer path lengths require mobile signal amplifiers such as
communicytes (Section 7.2.6), dedicated fixed-position communication organs with repeater protocols, or packet routing networks
analogous to the Internet (Section 7.3).
7.2.3 Electromagnetic Broadcast Communication
The receipt of externally-generated radiofrequency (rf ) power
signals up to ~MHz frequencies by nanorobot antennas has already
been considered in Section 6.4.2. Such signals are readily adapted
to communication and may carry ~MHz signals into the human
body, allowing information transfers to in vivo nanorobots of up to
~106 bits/sec from an external signal intensity of 0.1 watts/m2
.
Eqn. 6.32 suggests that rf signals pass through soft tissue with
negligible absorption, leaving most of the signal energy available
for detection by nanorobot receivers. (See also Section 4.7.1.)
While externally-generated rf signals may be detectable by
nanorobots, onboard submicron-scale broadcast antennas probably
cannot generate rf signals of sufficient power for meaningful
device-to-device communications. For example, low-frequency
electromagnetic waves of wavelength λrf and frequency νrf customarily
are generated using a simple electric dipole of length dE << λrf / 2 π,
or using a magnetic dipole loop antenna of diameter dM << λrf / 2 π. If
the current carried by either antenna is Idipole, then the average
transmitted power for each radiator is given by727:

P 1
3 c d I (watts) E 0 E
rf
2
dipole
2 = 

 
 π µ  λ {Eqn. 7.10}

P 1
12 c d M I (watts) 5
0 M
rf
4
dipole
2 = 

 
 π µ  λ {Eqn. 7.11}

P
P
4 d
 d
E
M
rf
2 2
4 4
E
M
= λ
π
{Eqn. 7.12}
where µ0 = 1.26 x 10-6 henry/m (permeability constant), and c =
3 x 108 m/sec (speed of light). For νrf = 1 KHz and dE = dM = 1
micron, PE / PM ~ 109 and the electric dipole is strongly preferred
over the magnetic dipole radiator; at high frequencies, the relative
power emission of the electric dipole is even greater.
An electric dipole antenna of length 1 micron and cross-section
1 micron2 carrying a fairly aggressive current density of ~108 amp/m2
consumes ~200 pW to produce an rf output power of only PE ~ 10-11
pW. Not only is this extremely energy-inefficient, but the signal
is too weak for detection by neighboring nanorobots. The 430-nm
electret pendulum antenna described by Eqn. 6.34 has a theoretical
minimum incident power detection limit of ~0.01 pW at 0.7 MHz;
a limit of kT eSNR = 30 zJ/cycle for a 10-11 pW signal implies a
maximum operating frequency of ~0.0003 Hz, too low to convey
any meaningful information. (Here, signal-to-noise ratio SNR = 2
(20 dB); error-corrected digital signals can provide virtually perfect
communications even below 10 dB.) Furthermore, simple scaling
predicts nanoelectric antennas will have nondirectional
radiation patterns, since antenna gain G ~ A / λ; for A = 1 micron2
antenna surface, then λ  1 micron (3 x 1014 Hz) to achieve G  1.
The reciprocity theorem in electromagnetic field theory predicts
that the radiation pattern of an antenna will have the same shape as
the response of that antenna when used as a receiver. W. Ware points
out that a group of antennas tuned to a given resonant frequency, if
illuminated by an external source at that frequency, will reradiate at
that frequency, essentially echoing the signal. Thus a ~1 watt external
source may induce 109 micron-scale antennas (one antenna per
nanorobot, with a billion nanorobots reporting) to reradiate a total
of ~0.01 pW at the same frequency, in theory detectable by a single
nanorobot rf receiver and certainly detectable by macroscale
instruments situated external to the body. (For comparison, television
signals entering home TV antennas typically provide ~10-10,000
pW to the receiver). Near-coherence of the echo is virtually assured
because the external rf interrogation signal passes through 30 cm of
tissue in ~10-9 sec, so ~MHz antennas located anywhere in the body
will lie at worst ~0.1% from perfect coherence. Interrogation pulses
at many different rf frequencies may simultaneously poll echoing
nanorobots programmed to monitor various internal phenomena
of interest (and to adjust their antenna resonances accordingly prior
Fig. 7.1. Acoustic pressure (Ap) at the surface of a cylindrical vibrating
piston acoustic radiator of radius r and input power Pin for ∆Pmin
~10-6 atm in water at 310 K (from Eqn. 7.6).
Basic Capabilities • Communication 183
to interrogation) in order to establish spatial distributions of those
phenomena—which may include temperature, pressure, biochemical
concentrations, bloodflow velocities, detection of specific cell types
or metabolic processes. In 1999, the 250-micron microtransponders
under development by PharmaSeq3432 were expected to be
interrogated at a throughput rate of 1000/sec.
Aside from the environmental sources of electrical noise already
described in Section 4.7.1, two additional potential sources deserve
brief mention. First, radio, television, radar and other broadcast
sources in developed countries produce a frequency-dependent
broadband background (e.g., a carrier-frequency spike for each
source) across a 0.01-1000 MHz spectrum up to ~10-11 watts/m2
-Hz
which at MHz frequencies passes through the human body largely
unattenuated (Section 6.4.2). However, a ~1 micron2 antenna
employing a ~1 MHz channel receives at most ~10-5 pW of this rf
broadcast energy, only ~0.002 kT/cycle which is almost certainly
undetectable. In other words, micron-scale nanorobots probably
cannot directly receive commercial TV, radio, or satellite broadcasts
or GPS signals unless mediated by a macroscale communication
organ (Section 7.3.4) or assemblage. Hence such broadcasts should
generate no detectable noise at these frequencies.
Second, electrical discharges associated with muscular and neural
action throughout the body cause electrical potentials to appear at the
skin3508 which are typically detected in a medical context during electrocardiographs (ECG or EKG, ~10-3 volt), electroencephalographs
(EEG, ~10-4 volt), and biofeedback monitoring with frequencies
ranging from 1-40 Hz. These surface waves also may reach ~10-11
watts/m2
-Hz, producing an undetectable 10-9 pW signal in a ~1
micron2 antenna using a 100-Hz channel—although an electric field
strength of >10-2 volts/m is in principle detectable by living cells
(Section 4.7.1). Thus, micron-scale nanorobots can sense individual
neural discharges nearby but probably cannot directly monitor global
brainwave, ECG, gastroelectric or intestinal electrical wave patterns
(which require a macroscale electrosensory organ or, possibly, cellular
eavesdropping).
Electromagnetic modulations νrf >> 10-100 MHz (which must
be imposed upon microwave, infrared, or optical carrier waves) may
be difficult to generate, control and detect using submicron
nanorobot components if those components are limited to mechanical ~GHz motions (Section 10.1.2.2); electronic components may
cycle faster. Such carrier waves are 99% absorbed by soft tissue for
path lengths ranging from ~10 cm for 100 MHz waves, to ~1 mm
for infrared, or ~40 microns for optical photons. Energetic carriers
also face a sharply declining count rate at the receiver due to the
increasingly particle-like nature of the nondirectional transmission
carrier at higher frequencies. For example, while micron-scale
solid-state lasers are available, from simple geometry, an omnidirectional 1-micron2 optical photon (~1014 Hz) emitter with a
1-pW power budget producing 107 photons/sec transmits only ~103
photons/sec to a 1-micron2 receiver located 100 microns away
(~maximum mean free path in tissue; Section 4.9.4). This limits
information transfer to ~103 bits/sec at an energy cost of ~106 zJ/
bit. Short bursts at much higher bit rates also satisfy the stated power
budget; using this strategy, photon intensity must still be held below
~100 watts/m2 (Section 6.4.2) at the source, so for a 1 micron2
transmitter the maximum transfer rate is ~105 bits/sec in a ~0.01
second burst, with bursts repeatable only once per second.
Relatively slow modulations impressed on high-frequency electromagnetic waves might provide another useful communications
channel. For example, nanorobots may detect each other’s heat
signatures, so modulations of those signatures can be used to transmit
messages. Consider a nanorobot immersed in a medium of thermal
conductivity Kt and heat capacity CV, producing Pn watts of thermal
power at a distance Rdetect from a second nanorobot equipped with
a thermal sensor of temperature sensitivity ∆Tmin. The maximum
detection range is

R P
4 K T detect n
t min
= π ∆ {Eqn 7.13}
For Kt = 0.623 watts/m-K for water at 310 K, ∆Tmin = 10-6 K
(Section 4.6), and Pn = 10-1000 pW, then Rdetect ~ 1-100 microns.
If Pn is pulsed on and off to send a message, the thermal time constant
τthermal = 4 π Rdetect CV / Kt = 0.0001-1 sec for CV = 4.19 x 106
watts/m3
-K in water at 310 K. Assuming single-channel bandwidth
~ 1 / τthermal, then detectable signals range from ~10 KHz (~104
bits/sec) at a distance Rdetect = 1 micron from a 10-pW modulated
heat signature down to 1 Hz (~1 bit/sec) at a distance Rdetect = 100
microns from a 1000-pW modulated heat signature.
7.2.4 Nanomechanical Communication
Internal communications (or interdevice communications
through hard junctions between linked devices; Section 5.4.2) are
readily achieved via sliding or rotating mechanical rods and couplings.
A thin diamondoid rod producing 1-nm displacements and
oscillating longitudinally at ~1 m/sec may transfer information at
~GHz frequencies. Similarly, a diamondoid transmission line carries
acoustic compression pulses at ~17,300 m/sec, providing a >10 GHz
bandwidth channel sufficient to support the ~GHz clocking speeds
typical of sensors and nanomechanical computers (Section 10.1).
A simple communication mode between unlinked nanorobots
operating in close quarters is simple physical tapping. During a 1
microsecond contact event, transfer of 1000 bits is allowed at a 1 GHz
line frequency assuming single-threaded transmission; arrays of isolated
transmission lines can transmit much more information. Cleavage
energies for diamond range from Ecleave = 10.6 J/m2 for the {111}
crystal plane up to 18.4 J/m2 for the {100} plane.536 Adopting the
more conservative number to estimate the minimum hammer/anvil
cleavage velocity vcleave, and as a crude approximation, a rodlike
diamondoid signal hammer 100 nm in length moving at velocity
vhammer with tip area Atip = 100 nm2 and mass mhammer
~ 3.5 x 10-20 kg impacting a diamondoid anvil at speeds of:

V V
2 E A
m 246 m/sec hammer cleave
cleave tip
hammer
1/2
< = 




 = {Eqn. 7.14}
cannot cause cleavage in an unfractured anvil structure. The smallest
detectable impact for this hammer has energy kT eSNR = (1/2) mhammer
vhammer2
, giving minimum detectable vhammer ~ 1.3 m/sec for SNR = 2
(Section 4.3.1) at T = 310 K. At this speed, and neglecting anvil
mass, a hammer cycled at νhammer = 1 GHz (~109 bits/sec) against a
spring-loaded receiver anvil has a displacement stroke of:

∆
ν x kT e
2 m 670 pm
SNR
hammer hammer
2
1/2
= 




 = {Eqn. 7.15}
well above the minimum detectable displacement of 10 pm (Section
4.3.1), giving a maximum power cost of kT eSNR νhammer ~ 32 pW
(~32 zJ/bit).
Mechanical communication can also be achieved by more passive
means, as for example the posting of Braille-like tactile-readable
information mechanically on the nanorobot surface which may be
scanned by neighboring nanorobots using compliant read tips at
the distal ends of flexible manipulator arms (Section 5.3.2.5).
184 Nanomedicine • Volume I
7.2.5 Cable Communication
Signals may be imposed upon any tethered power transmission
(Section 6.4.3), allowing the transfer of information as well as
energy. This Section examines the ability of various cable carriers to
transmit information. The drawbacks of tethered power transmission
systems enumerated in Section 6.4.3.6 also apply to in vivo communication cables.
7.2.5.1 Electrical Cables
Uninsulated wires risk electrical leakage and unnecessary heat
transfer; unshielded wires produce stray fields that may attract unwanted
attention from mobile elements of the immune system, e.g.,
electrosensitive leukotaxis (Section 4.9.3.1). Thus coaxial cable or
“coax” is the proper transmission line for in vivo electrical cable
communications. Unlike waveguides, coaxial cable is not a resonant
device, hence the traveling wave frequencies it carries may be varied
continuously down to DC. The electric fields within a coax line
have axial symmetry. However, serious design complications may
arise if the transmitted wavelength (λ) is less than the circumference of
the annular dielectric space between the conductors, because a second
(nonaxial) mode of rf propagation with diametral symmetry can
then be excited simultaneously. To avoid this complication, a 1-micron
diameter coax should be held to a practical upper frequency limit of
c / π dcoax < 1 x 1014 Hz for cable lengths >> λ.
Intracoaxial scattering and absorption are negligible, so for
single-channel bandwidth the maximum coaxial bit rate Imax consistent with a nanorobot onboard communication power budget Pcomm
using rf or microwave photons (h νcoax / kT ln(2) << 1)
occurs at the full-power transmission frequency

νcoax max comm (~ I ) P
kT ln(2) (Hz) ˙ = {Eqn. 7.16}
Thus the maximum coaxial transmission frequency is 0.1 GHz (108
bits/sec) for Pcomm = 0.3 pW, 1 GHz at 3 pW, and 100 GHz (1011
bits/sec) for Pcomm = 300 pW (>3 zJ/bit).
7.2.5.2 Infrared and Optical Cables
Photon energy equals thermal noise (h νequal / kT ln(2) = 1) in
the far infrared, specifically, at νequal = 6 x 1012 Hz for T = 310 K. At
still higher frequencies, the cost per bit becomes the energy per photon,
or h νoptical, hence the maximum transmission frequency becomes

νoptical comm
1/2 P
h = (Hz) 

 

 {Eqn. 7.17}
Silica optical fibers are damaged by near-UV photons at frequencies
exceeding ~1015 Hz (λ ~ 300 nm), giving an upper limit on optical
information transfer rates. Transmitting 1015 UV photons per second
requires a power budget of Pcomm = 1 milliwatt; holding intensity to
<105 watts/m2 for safety reasons (Section 6.4.3.2) mandates a fiber
>100 microns in diameter. Cables this large are suitable primarily
for relatively short internodal trunk lines (Section 7.3.1). At ~105
watts/m2 a 1 micron2 fiber can safely continuously transmit ~105
pW, enough to generate 1013 photons/sec at 10 THz (~1013 bits/
sec), or ~10 zJ/bit. Note that below νequal, the energy cost per bit is
constant; above νequal, the energy cost per bit rises linearly with
frequency. Regenerative systems could in theory recover and reuse
some of this energy.
7.2.5.3 Acoustic Cables and Transmission Lines
Consider an acoustic compression signal of frequency νacoust traveling
down a fluid-filled transmission cable of length lcable and radius rcable.
In order to be detected at a signal/noise ratio SNR = 2, each pulse
cycle must transfer a minimum energy kT eSNR to a receiver of
volume L3 at the cable terminus; hence from Eqn. 4.29, the maximum
detectable pulse frequency νacoust = Irec L2 / kT eSNR (Hz), where Irec
is the acoustic power intensity at the receiver. To obtain this intensity at
the receiver, the input signal power at the other end of the cable
must be P0  π rcable2
 Itrans (watts) where Itrans is the power intensity
of the signal transmitter. Combining these relations with Eqn. 6.44
for acoustic attenuation in cables gives

ν α
acoust
2
trans
L 2
kT e
 I e SNR
tube cable ≤ 




 − l ( ) Hz {Eqn. 7.18}
where αtube is given by Eqn. 6.45 with a ~νacoust1/2 dependency. To
avoid cavitation in pure water (Section 6.4.3.3) and to ensure safety
in the unlikely event of cable detachment in vivo, maximum Itrans =
104 watts/m2 of acoustic energy (Fig. 6.8). For a cable of diameter 1
micron terminating on a receiver of volume (680 nm)3 sensitive to
10-6 atm displacements (Section 4.5.1), then νacoust ~ 1 GHz (109
bits/sec) for a cable of length lcable = 14 microns (~8000 zJ/bit). A
1000-micron long cable can transmit up to ~1 MHz; νacoust ~ 1
KHz at lcable ~ 5 cm; and νacoust ~ 1 Hz at lcable ~ 2 meters. For
intradevice communications, νacoust ~ 1 GHz for L = 300 nm, lcable
= 1 micron, and rtube = 50 nm, though pure diamond fiber may be
more efficient in this case.
A solid diamond acoustic transmission line transfers signals over
great distances at GHz frequencies with almost no power losses, in
part because of the extreme stiffness of diamond. Consider a rod of
volume Vrod at temperature Trod, made of a material with a thermal
coefficient of volume expansion β and heat capacity CV, to which a
pressure pulse ∆P is applied at one end that travels at velocity vsound
(~17,300 m/sec for diamond) to the other end. In the worst-case
thermodynamic cycle, Drexler 10 gives the total energy dissipation
per pulse Wmax as

W T V P
C max (joule/cycle) rod rod
2 2
V
= β ∆ {Eqn. 7.19}
For diamond at Trod = 310 K, β = 3.5 x 10-6 /K and CV = 1.8 x 106
joule/m3
-K.460,567 Thus a 1-atm pulse that is applied to a transmission
line consisting of a diamond rod 1 micron in length and (10 nm)2
in cross sectional area (Vrod = 10-22 m3
) requires a pulse input
energy of ~10,000 zJ, but suffers an energy loss during transmission
of at most Wmax = 2 x 10-6 zJ. Under smooth mechanical cycling,
nanomechanical systems may approach the isothermal limit and
significantly reduce dissipation still further,10 to ~1% Wmax at ~1
GHz and ~0.001% Wmax at ~1 MHz. Thus even at νrod ~ 1 GHz
the losses using 1-atm pulses amount to only ~20 zJ and the
transmission of energy is still ~99.8% efficient.
7.2.5.4 Mechanical Cables
Information may be transferred mechanically by modulating the
turning frequency of a rotating cable. In this case the mechanical
load is applied by the receiver at the cable terminus as it measures
frequency changes in the received signal (e.g., FM modulation).
Section 6.4.3.4 discusses cable operating modes, frequencies,
Basic Capabilities • Communication 185
dimensions, and power requirements. For example, a rotating cable
2 nm in diameter and ~50 nm long (suitable for internal data
transmissions) operated in AC mode can convey 6 x 104 bits/sec at
a power cost of 1 pW (~16,000 zJ/bit).
Power and control signals can also be transmitted through a stiff
reciprocating member, operating in the manner of a bicycle brake
or derailleur cable. Molecular control cables using polyyne rods
encased in single-walled carbon nanotube (Section 2.3.2) sheaths is
one simple example.2281 Polyyne is a chain of carbon atoms with
alternating single (0.1377 nm) and triple (0.1192 nm) bonds, hence
the polyyne cable has ~7.8 carbon atoms and a mass of ~1.5 x 10-25
kg per nanometer of length. The stretching stiffness of the single
bond is ~824 N/m, the triple bond ~1560 N/m, and the length of
a bond pair is 0.2569 nm, giving the compliance for a cable of
length L of (7.2 x 106
) L (m/N), or the stiffness as ks = (1.4 x 10-7)
/ L (N/m). Thus an L = 1 micron polyyne cable stretches by ~1 nm
when a tensile force of 140 pN is applied. Thermal noise produces
an uncertainty in the position of the end of the polyyne cable, which
varies approximately10 as ∆x ~ (kT / ks)
1/2 ~ 0.18 nm in the previous
example, at 310 K.
7.2.5.5 Chemomessenger Cables
Unlike the chemical messaging described in Section 7.2.1, which
was dominated by diffusive effects, information transfer using
chemical messenger molecules that are confined within sealed pipes
is controlled by the laminar bulk flow rate of the rapidly-moving
carrier fluid.
Consider a chemomessenger cable of length lcable and radius rcable
carrying a fluid of viscosity η at a volumetric flow rate of V
maintained by a pressure differential of pcable between the two ends
of the cable. Assuming the fluid is a 10% suspension of messenger
molecules of information density Dmessage ~ 26 bits/nm3 (Section
7.2.1.1) with viscosity similar to human plasma, then net fluid
information density Dfluid ~ 2.6 x 1027 bits/m3
; from the
Hagen-Poiseuille law (Section 9.2.5) the maximum information
transfer rate is

˙
I ( /sec) 8 l chemo
cable
= π
η
rp D bits cable cable cable
4
{Eqn. 7.20}
Assuming a safe, ultraconservative pcable = 1 atm and taking rcable =
0.5 micron and η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec, then Ichemo = 1014 bits/sec
through a cable of length lcable = 50 microns, with power consumption Pchemo = π rtube
4
 pcable2
 / 8 η lcable = 4500 pW (~0.04 zJ/
bit). For a cable 0.5 meter in length, Ichemo = 1010 bits/sec and Pchemo
= 0.4 pW (~0.04 zJ/bit). If pcable is more liberally raised to 1000
atm, a cable 0.5 meter in length can transfer Ichemo = 1013 bits/sec
requiring Pchemo = 450 nanowatts (~40 zJ/bit). While these are
phenomenal information transport rates compared to other methods,
two important caveats are in order.
First, such high transfer rates are purchased at the price of
significantly increased receiver complexity and message processing
time, since the message molecules must be captured, oriented,
unspooled, fed past a read head at relatively slow speed, then stored,
recycled, or disposed of properly. Data carrier fluid must be returned
to the transmitter using a second cable; a double-cable pair establishes
a complete fluidic circuit. The additional transmitter complexity
and extra power required for chemical modifications of message
carriers may be confined to external facilities and hence do not
significantly constrain in vivo operations.
Second, the message travel speed from one end of the cable
to the other is limited to the fluid flow velocity vfluid = rtube2
pcable / 8 η lcable. Thus a given message requires a travel time
tmessage = lcable / vfluid = 8 η lcable2 / rcable2
 pcable ~ 0.001 sec to pass
through a 50-micron-long 1-micron-diameter cable; a 109 bit message
molecule measuring ~0.4 micron in diameter (Eqn. 7.2) travels at
~5 cm/sec and therefore only transfers the message information at
~1012 bits/sec, or ~5 zJ/bit, near the theoretical minimum. Similarly,
tmessage ~ 4 days through a 1-meter-long micron-wide cable at 1 atm
driving pressure (~6 minutes if driving pressure is raised to 1000
atm).
R. Merkle points out that these two restrictions may be ameliorated
by employing a cable transporting monomeric units that can adopt
one of two or more distinct physical conformations. In particular, if
the monomeric units are flat (e.g., small bits of graphite), are held
together by short sections of polyyne (carbyne rods), and if the cable
is formed in a flat housing, then one bit of information can be
transmitted by rotating each monomeric unit into one of two positions
which are separated by 180˚. Minimal energy should be required to
rotate a monomer entering the cable input, or subsequently to read
the rotational state of a transported monomer exiting the cable output.
A monomer transport speed of v = 1 m/sec and a 1-nm separation
between successively arriving bit-carrying monomeric units allows
a νcable ~ GHz data transfer rate. From Eqn. 3.19, Pdrag ~ 10-16
watts per monomeric unit giving a total cable power dissipation of
Pcable = Pdrag lcable νcable / v ~ 105 pW (105 zJ/bit) taking lcable = 1
meter, νcable = 1 GHz and v = 1 m/sec.
7.2.6 Communicytes
A useful supplemental means of information transport throughout the body is a mobile mass-storage memory device called a
communicyte. Communicytes may serve an analogous function to
postal carriers—messages are delivered to them, passed among them,
and eventually delivered by them to the intended recipients. Mass
mailings to selected recipient subpopulations are also possible. Classes
of communicyte mass memory may include rapidly spooled
hydrofluorocarbon memory tape (Section 7.2.1.1), dense banks of
diamondoid register rods forming a random access memory (RAM)
(Fig. 10.2), or other means (Section 10.2).
In the first case, a 1 micron3 storage block could contain a 1010
bit, 0.4-micron3
, 3-meter length of memory tape, with the remaining
0.6-micron3 volume occupied by read/write heads, spool drivers,
housing and the like. With a read speed10 of ~30 cm/sec (~109 bits/sec)
the entire data cache may be offloaded in ~10 sec. The energy cost
to rewrite the tape is 1-1000 zJ/bit (Sections 6.5.6 (B) and 7.2.1.8),
hence the entire tape may be erased and overwritten in 1-1000 sec
assuming a 10 pW tape-handling power budget, giving a write speed
of 107
-1010 bits/sec.
In the second case, register rods of cross-section ~1 nm2 (described
in Drexler10) require ~4 nm of length to accommodate a single
input/output rod pair and can store at least ~1 bit/40 nm3
. Thus a
0.4 micron3 block of tightly-packed register-rod RAM may hold
107 bits, with the remaining 0.6 micron3 of the 1 micron3 storage
block reserved for springs, latches, and other essential mechanisms
(including address-decoding logic) to access the stored data, and
housings. Read and write speeds are ~1010 bits/sec; full-cycle energy
losses are ~5 zJ/bit assuming 1 bit/register,10 a ~50 pW power draw
during the ~1 millisec required to read or write the entire onboard
data cache.
Communicytes may also incorporate mechanisms allowing data
transfers among themselves or between themselves and living or
186 Nanomedicine • Volume I
artificial entities (Section 7.4). Communicytes will normally be
deployed as components of a communication network of such
devices, as described in Section 7.3.2, although they may also serve
as mobile data repositories or software libraries.
7.3 Communication Networks
To maintain a continuous information flow for sensor data sharing,
mission monitoring and wide-area control, it is convenient to
establish a communication network in vivo that facilitates
point-to-point and broadcast messaging. Two distinct physical
network architectures are readily discerned—fiber networks (Section
7.3.1) and mobile networks (Section 7.3.2).
7.3.1 Fiber Networks
Fiber networks may employ fixed-topology data-conducting
cables (Section 7.2.5) of virtually any description, including electrical,
optical, acoustical, mechanical, or chemical. A complete design
analysis of each of these network classes is beyond the scope of this
book. The following discussion focuses on high-frequency electrical
and optical cables, which most clearly exemplify the salient characteristics of fiber networks.
Suppose that a simple three-dimensional hierarchical Cartesian
grid of electromagnetic communication fibers of radius rfiber is
embedded in a block of tissue of volume Vtiss (m3
) with a mean
separation between adjacent parallel fibers of xfiber1 in the rectangular
grid. This defines a total of Vtiss / xfiber1
3 = Nnode1 intersection nodes
and an equal number of cubic voxels, each of volume xfiber1
3 (m3
)
and bounded by Nseg1 = 3 Nnode1 fiber segments each of length
xfiber1.* Total fiber volume is Vfiber1 = 3 π rfiber2
 Vtiss / xfiber2 and total
fiber length Lfiber1 = 3 Vtiss / xfiber12
. Allowing a maximum power
budget of Pnet1 (watts) for the network, then each internodal fiber
segment may dissipate up to Pseg1 = Pnet1 xfiber1
3 / 3 Vtiss. A cable
energy dissipation of Ebit1 (joules/bit) implies a maximum data traffic
of I = Pseg1 / Ebit1 on each segment between nodes.
For whole-body installation in a human being, Vtiss ~ 0.1 m3
.
For the first subnetwork, xfiber1 = 100 microns, rfiber = 0.5 microns,
and Pnet1 = 1 watt, giving total fiber length Lfiber1 = 3 x 107 meters,
fiber volume Vfiber1 = 24 cm3
, and Nseg1 = 3 x 1011 internodal fiber
segments defining Nnode1 = 1011 communications voxels. This
network may be emplaced by ~1011 installer nanorobots (Chapter
19) of size ~1000 micron3 that travel through tissue at 1-100
microns/sec (Section 9.4.4). Each installer unspools ~300 microns
of internally stored fiber (~240 micron3
) in 3-300 sec while consuming
<<1 pW of motive power (Section 9.4.4.2), then briefly conjugates
(Section 9.4.4.4) with other installers to make the nodal connections.
Using GHz nanocoax (diameter ~1 micron) with Ebit1 ~ 3 zJ/bit,
internodal traffic has a capacity of I1 ~ 109 bits/sec (~1 GHz). Cable
power density is ~40,000 W/m3
; power intensity is ~4 W/m2
.
Three additional subnetworks are interleaved with the first, each
passing messages to the others through appropriate nodal junctions:
In subnetwork #2, xfiber2 = 1 mm, giving total fiber length Lfiber2
= 3 x 105 meters and 108 communications voxels. For Pnet2 = 1 watt
and using a single IR line or a bundle of ten 100 GHz lines (diameter
~3.6 microns) with Ebit2 ~ 3 zJ/bit, I2 ~ 1012 bits/sec.
In subnetwork #3, xfiber3 = 1 cm, giving total fiber length Lfiber3 = 3
x 103 meters and 105 communications voxels. For Pnet3 = 1 watt and
using a bundle of ten 10-THz optical cables (Section 7.2.5.2; bundle
diameter ~3.6 microns) with Ebit3 ~ 10 zJ/bit, I3 ~ 1015 bits/sec.
In subnetwork #4, xfiber4 = 10 cm, giving total fiber length Lfiber4
= 30 meters and 100 communications voxels. For Pnet4 = 1 watt and
using a bundle of 100,000 10-THz optical cables (bundle diameter
~360 microns) with Ebit4 ~ 10 zJ/bit, I4 ~ 1018 bits/sec, and power
intensity ~105 W/m2
, the maximum deemed safe for in vivo
applications (Section 6.4.3.2).
Assuming 5 zJ/bit switching losses at each node, total power
dissipation of all nodes in each subnetwork is ~0.5 watts, or ~2
watts for nodes at all four levels. Combining the four subnetworks
into a single well-linked network gives the ability to transfer 109
billion-bit (e.g., “genome packet”) messages per second across the
entire installation volume—providing ~1018 bits/sec along the optical
backbone with a 6-watt power budget. By comparison, in 1997 the
Internet backbone (admittedly much larger in physical extent) could
transfer only ~1010 bits/sec, average global communications traffic
was ~1012 bits/sec, total worldwide Ethernet capacity was ~1013
bits/sec, and worldwide data storage in all movies, recordings,
corporate and government databases, and personal files was informally
estimated by Michael Dertouzos,983 Philip Morrison,1649 and
Michael Lesk3130 as ~1019 bits.
Messages are transmitted acoustically from in vivo nanorobots
present within a (100 micron)3 communications voxel to the nearest
local network node. These nonoptical links are the principal bottleneck in the system. In the worst case, a nanorobot lies at most Ln /
2 = (31/2 / 2) xfiber1 from the nearest local node (Section 5.2.1 (F)).
From Eqn. 7.9, taking ν = 100 MHz, fduty = 1%, r = 1 micron and
Xpath = 87 microns, then Pin = 550 pW per voxel. Each communications voxel contains up to ~100 (20 micron)3 tissue cells, so one
nanorobot per cell communicating continuously on a 104 bit/sec
channel produces 106 bits/sec of message traffic, just 0.1% of rated
capacity of each local node. At this maximum bit rate, local acoustic
power dissipation totals ~55 watts, giving a total of ~60 watts for
the network. If nanorobots can physically dock at a node, the need
for acoustic links is eliminated; bit rate per channel rises to ~107
bits/sec and network power draw falls to ~6 watts.
Assigning one nanorobot in each tissue cell (~1013 nanorobots)
a unique address requires each message packet to contain a log2
(1013) = 44-bit sender identifier plus a 44-bit recipient identifier,
mandating a ~100-bit header allowing 12 check bits, the absolute
minimum message packet size for a comprehensive cell-addressible
network. At a 1 MHz acoustic nodal access rate, a simple 200-bit
message takes ~0.2 millisec to upload or download, plus ~2 meters
/ ~c = ~10-8 sec to pass through the network at ~0.67c, where c = 3
x 108 m/sec (speed of light). Nodal read/write functions should
operate at 10-10,000 MHz (Section 7.2.6) and optical switching
may be even faster, so signal passage through at least the local nodes
should impose no significant additional delays. Hence simple messages
may be passed between any two specific nanorobots in ~0.4 millisec;
a complex 109
-bit message requires ~1000 sec. By comparison,
simple adjacent internodal Internet “pinging” takes ~10 millisec.
(Again, node-docked nanorobots with no acoustic intermediaries
can exchange messages several orders of magnitude faster.)
Communication with bloodborne nanorobots is most convenient
during capillary passage (once every ~60 sec), when nanorobots
should remain within the operating range of local nodes during the
entire transit owing to the narrow width of such vessels (4-15 microns).
Capillaries are typically ~1 mm long with flow rates of 0.2-1.5 mm/
sec, so the passing nanorobot has 0.7-5 sec to upload or download
* This network design, with each node having 6 connecting fibers, may be unduly redundant, resulting in excess fiber usage. Single nodes may need no more than 4 connecting
fibers, forming a tetrahedral grid.
Basic Capabilities • Communication 187
messages. Given the ~0.2 millisec echo time, a nanorobot entering
a capillary can announce its position and begin receiving its email
before it has traveled more than ~0.2 micron through the narrowest
vessels; messages of up to ~5 x 106 bits may be sent or received
during each capillary transit.
Communication from the arterioles (average ~100 microns
diameter) requires contacting the nearest local node which may be
150 microns away, boosting required nanorobot acoustic transmitter
power to ~1600 pW at 100 MHz. Energy costs become prohibitive
in the arteries and larger veins and other special locations such as
the cardiac chambers, the bursae, and the bladder. Simple 200-bit
messages might possibly be transacted by nanorobots immediately
adjacent to the 25,000-micron diameter aortal wall; maximum flow
velocity of ~1 m/sec carries an unanchored nanorobot beyond the
100-micron operational radius of a medial local node in just ~10-4
sec. Under conditions of bradycardia or cardiostasis, communications
improve significantly in the vascular regions because bloodborne
nanorobots remain longer in the vicinity of nearby embedded nodes.
Subdermal networks may be useful in some specialized applications,
but the skin area (~2 m2
) is relatively small in comparison with
various internal surfaces such as the vascular network (~300 m2
).
Fiber nodes may store considerable quantities of useful data. For
instance, in the above example there are 1011 local network nodes.
If each node stores just ~2600 bits on hydrofluorocarbon memory
tape at 26 bits/nm3 (Section 7.2.1.1) accessible in <10-5 sec (Section
7.2.6), this cache occupies a volume of ~100 nm3 per node and the
entire local nodal network storage capacity is ~3 x 1014 bits, or ~one
Library of Congress.
7.3.2 Mobile Networks
In a fiberless network, mobile communicytes may be deployed
in tissue and blood, and serve as communications nodes. Devices
enter a tissue and station themselves for optimum data transfer. All
nodal and internodal traffic is acoustic. With a spacing of 100
microns between nodes, continuous internodal message transmission
at 100 MHz with fduty = 1% using an r = 1 micron radiator requires
~600 pW (Eqn. 7.9). From relations given in Section 7.3.1, a
whole-body installation with Vtiss ~ 0.1 m3 requires ~1011
communicytes uniformly distributed throughout the tissues, a
maximum network dissipation of ~60 watts plus another 0.5 watts
for node switching losses. Since broadcasts are necessarily omnidirectional for transmitters smaller than ~vsound / ν = 15 microns at
100 MHz, the network is entirely uniform with no backbone and
total long-distance message capacity is ~106 bits/sec in broadcast
mode. Limits on broadcast power can minimize bandwidth overlap
and crosstalk between nonadjacent nodes. At 100 MHz and fduty =
10%, a whole-body network capacity of 107 bits/sec generates an
uncomfortable ~600 watts of waste heat; if these communicytes are
installed in only <17% of the body volume, then local 107 bit/sec
networks may be made available at <100 watts. There may be many
conceptual similarities to telephonic cellular networks,1650,1651
including frequency re-use, handoff algorithms, and the likelihood
of large numbers of point-to-point ~106 bit/sec communication
sessions through different modes without straining the system. Such
design details, while interesting, are beyond the scope of this book.
Non-communicyte mobile nanorobots access the network via
acoustic channels as in the fiber network. The ν fduty = 1 MHz/
node limit implies that long-distance communications will be sharply
curtailed within the tissues. However, local-area communications
may have quite satisfactory bit rates. For example, each of 100
nanorobots present in one (100 micron)3 communications voxel
can send continuous ~100 bit/sec messages (using only ~100 Hz of
available bandwidth) simultaneously to each of 100 nanorobots
located in an adjacent voxel. Thus total mononodal traffic over all
1011 nodes can approach the ~1018 bits/sec of the optical fiber
backbone throughout the entire installation volume. At a 0.01 MHz/
channel nodal access rate for each of 100 nearby nanorobots, a simple
200-bit message takes 20 millisec to upload or download, plus ~200
microns / vsound ~10-7 sec to pass between adjacent communications
voxels at the speed of sound (vsound ~ 1500 m/sec in soft tissues and
whole blood; Table 6.7). Hence simple messages may be passed
between any two specific nanorobots in nearby cells in ~40 millisec,
though a complex 109
-bit message requires an impractical ~105 sec.
Bloodborne communicytes provide a supplementary
long-distance messaging capability. Deployment of ~1010 5-micron3
communicytes in a 5.4-liter blood volume (<0.001% concentration by
volume) gives a mean interdevice separation of ~80 microns.
Communicytes passing through a 1 mm capillary (averaging 10
embedded nodes along its length) in ~ 1 sec can upload or download
~105 bits at each node. Each bloodborne communicyte has a patrol
volume of (80 microns)3 = 500,000 micron3
, about ten times the
volume of the average capillary, so a fresh communicyte enters each
capillary about once every 10 seconds and can receive messages
totalling 106 bits during each transit. The fixed patrol volume per
bloodborne communicyte implies that these devices will not remain
in continuous contact with their bloodborne neighbors while in
transit through vessels much smaller than ~80 microns in diameter
(e.g., terminal arterioles, metarterioles, capillaries, and the
postcapillary and collecting venules; Section 8.2.1). For example,
in a 40 micron-diameter terminal arteriole the mean interdevice
spacing grows from ~80 microns to ~400 microns, resulting in a
temporary communications blackout between bloodborne neighbors
during transit through the microvasculature. The blackout may
normally last 5-10 seconds (Section 8.2.1.1).
Once received by a bloodborne communicyte, simple
long-distance messages are quickly rebroadcast (post-blackout)
throughout the bloodstream communicyte fleet (which draws ~6
watts continuous), the signal propagating at near the speed of sound,
finally reaching the one communicyte situated nearest to the
intended recipient node in at most ~2 meters / vsound ~ 10-3 sec.
Assuming a 10 microsec delay between rebroadcasts due to reading
a 10-bit routing header at 1 MHz implies an additional rebroadcast
delay of at most ~0.2 sec through a chain of ~20,000 communicytes
over a ~2 meter path length. Allowing up to ~10 sec to enter and
traverse the entire length of the relevant capillary, then long-distance
point-to-point messaging requires at most ~11 sec and allows
transfer rates of ~105 bits/sec or better systemwide. Total
long-distance capacity is limited to acoustic bandwidth and the
maximum transfer rate of each communicyte, say, at fduty = 1%, or
~106 bits/sec (Section 7.2.6) equivalent to ~0.01% of the entire
Internet backbone in 1997. Bloodborne communicytes also provide a
useful messaging facility for bloodborne non-communicyte
nanorobots.
Besides serving as mobile message repeater stations, bloodborne
communicytes may further boost total system capacity by acting as
physical message carriers. For example, a single communicyte bearing
messages totalling 1010 bits (Section 7.2.6) circumnavigates the entire
vascular circuit once every ~60 seconds. Thus, in theory,
point-to-point messages may be carried throughout the entire
operational volume at an effective ~108 bits/sec rate in this manner,
most useful for nanorobots in peripheral tissues attempting to send
messages to devices (or postal depots) located in the heart or lungs
(organs which the entire blood volume reliably transits once every
circuit). (Acoustic downloading at the destination is limited to
188 Nanomedicine • Volume I
106 bits/sec at fduty = 1%, but modest locomotion skills and maneuverability would permit physical docking with nodes allowing up to
~1010 bit/sec mechanical downloading rates; purely statistical
collision-mediated data transfer is not efficient at these low bloodstream concentrations.) A total of 1020 (message-carrier) bits may be
in transit at any one time in the blood. Except for this message-carrier
function and the “blackout” effect in the microvasculature,
communicyte network performance is not significantly affected by
conditions of bradycardia or cardiostasis.
As in the fiber network, communicyte nodes may store considerable quantities of data. Assuming up to ~1010 bits for each of
1011 nodal devices, either network has a maximum total storage
capacity of ~1021 bits. A single dedicated (4 mm)3 library nodule
(Section 7.3.4) implanted anywhere in the body can also contain
~1021 bits.
7.3.3 Networks Assessment
Fiber networks excel at high-capacity long-distance communication, with additional capacity readily added to the design by
multiplying the number density or bundle density of fibers. Acoustic
mobile relay networks have relatively low and fundamentally limited
bandwidth. An additional advantage of the fiber network is speed—
point-to-point fiber messaging takes ~10-4 sec vs. up to ~10 sec for
the mobile network. Both of these advantages may be important in
transdermal communication and whole-body diagnostic monitoring
applications.
However, fiber and mobile networks may provide roughly
equivalent local transmission speed and capacity if both must
employ acoustic nodal access, as this provides the highest endogenously
transmitted bit rate per unit power consumption for mobile
nanorobots that are arbitrarily positioned network users. Thus in
applications requiring predominantly local information transfers,
the choice of basic network architecture may be driven by factors
other than system total capacity and speed.
Fiber networks also have many significant disadvantages. Both
fibers and mobile nanodevices can be made immunochemically
biocompatible, but fibers are physically vulnerable and can cause
serious physical tissue and cellular irritation (Section 6.4.3.6). It is
well-known in dermatology that subdermally-placed, but incompletely
absorbed, “dissolvable” stitches can work their way back to the surface
of the skin; fiber network elements could be similarly ejected from
the body. Some of these mechanical difficulties possibly may be
overcome using a helical coil or a fiber which is coupled to a
biocompatible sheathing using compliant internal springs;
large-diameter fibers could be installed within bones where they
would experience minimal flexing and immune system exposure,
although transmissions across joints or tissues with high flexure or
vascularization might still be required to be acoustic.
Networks with mobile components are easier and quicker to
install, to reconfigure, to upgrade while in vivo, or to remove in the
event of malfunction or change in medical objectives, than fiber
networks with immobile components. On the other hand,
communication protocols may need to be substantially more complicated to provide the necessary reliability with drifting nodes.
The fixed physical positions of fiber network nodes is also a major
disadvantage because tissue movement is ubiquitous inside the human
body, causing progressive fiber misalignment. Examples of such
movement include untreated metastasizing tumors or benign
growing tumors, angiogenesis in injured or heavily exercised tissue,
enlargement and shrinkage of tissue channels or prelymphatics
after wounding or edema, adipocyte deposition, and the breakdown
or buildup of muscle tissue; cell loss and tissue modifications in the
brain, sclerotic livers, radiation-damaged bone marrows, chancres
and blisters, hematomas, and the uterus and related tissues during
pregnancy; normal periodic movements in muscle-laden tissues such
as the biceps, cardiac tissue, arterial walls, and the thoracoabdominal
diaphragm; and other nonpathological but irregular movements such
as tissues which may rapidly inflate with fluid, including the sex
organs and related tissues, the bladder, and to a lesser extent the
lungs. With such movement, nodal positional assignments quickly
become obsolete and nodes may be carried out of acoustic range.
Fiber spatial distributions may develop undesirable clumping and
rarefactions. Fiber-embedded tissues which slough off in the normal
course of events (e.g., epidermal, endometrial, placental,
gastrointestinal) may carry fibers out into the uterine or intestinal
canals, or expose them to air in the case of the epidermis.
The paradoxical conclusion is that overall fiber network reliability
may be improved by adding nodal mobility. One crude biological
analog is the filopodia of embryonic axons which can drag their
fibrous neural cargo through embryonic tissue at ~0.1 micron/
sec.3296 While adult tissue may in theory have a more solidified extracellular matrix (ECM) and greater intercellular connectivity,
making dragging more difficult, leukocyte and fibroblast mobility
through ECM is typically 0.05-0.70 microns/sec (Section 9.4.4.2).
7.3.4 Dedicated Communication Organs
By analogy to implanted energy organs (Section 6.4.4), dedicated
macroscopic organs may be installed in the human body to facilitate
internal communications. Such organs could serve as high-capacity
data storage, computation, and retransmission nodes in internal
networks; as storage bays or reprogramming facilities for
communicytes; as transdermal links to the outside world to permit
rapid inmessaging and outmessaging, offloading of major data
processing tasks to ex vivo computational resources or to dedicated
computational organs (Section 10.2.5), or integration with external
sensory, communications, and navigational facilities; as rf, TV, or
satellite broadcast receivers, for example to receive Global Positioning
System (GPS) signals or personal email; as radio signal transmitters
for outmessaging; as convenient foci for multisystem or autogenous
control, coordination, or data distribution; or as library nodules or
personal medical history information storage devices.
7.4 Communications Tasks
Nanomedical messaging tasks fall into three broad categories:
1. nanorobots communicating with externalities including physicians,
laboratory machines, external computers, or even the conscious
perception of the patient himself;
2. nanorobots communicating with other nanorobots; and
3. nanorobots communicating with human organs, tissues, or
cellular systems.
Communications data flowing into a nanorobot from some
extrarobotic source is called inmessaging; outward-bound data
transfers are called outmessaging. A comprehensive examination of
all these possibilities is beyond the scope of this book. The present
discussion is limited to a brief overview of the following elementary
situations: inmessaging from external sources (Section 7.4.1),
inmessaging from patient or user (Section 7.4.2), intradevice messaging (Section 7.4.3), interdevice messaging (Section 7.4.4), biocellular
messaging (Section 7.4.5), outmessaging to the user (Section 7.4.6),
outmessaging to an external receiver (Section 7.4.7), and transvenue
outmessaging (Section 7.4.8). Some of the examples presented may
Basic Capabilities • Communication 189
appear whimsical from a 20th century perspective, but they illustrate
the incredible variety and power inherent in the technology. A
discussion of user interfaces is largely deferred to Chapter 12.
7.4.1 Inmessaging from External Sources
Inmessaging occurs when information is conveyed from a source
external to the human body, or external to working nanodevices, to
a nanorobotic receiver located inside the human body. Security
protocols (Chapter 12) are a strong necessity here. The receiver
may be associated with medical nanodevices, either individually
or collectively, or with specialized communications organs.
Methods of modulating power sources to achieve data transmission
have already been examined at length in Section 7.2. To summarize
a few of the many possibilities—commands, data, software, processed
results of extensive computations, and messages from medical
personnel may be conveyed into the human body by:
A. Chemical Inmessaging — communicytes or messenger molecules
encased in pills or suspended in ingestible liquids, injectable or IV
fluids, mouthwashes, earwashes, eyedrops, inhalants, nasal sprays,
dermal patches, suppositories or enemas; or artificially vascularized
data secretion glands transdermally linked to external control
mechanisms.
B. Acoustic Inmessaging — dermal ultrasound transducers
including handheld units, cuffs or bracelets, or transmission through
water baths; vibrating treatment tables, beds or chairs; ingestible
sonosondes; osteoimplanted acoustic radiators or implanted dental
vibrators with rf or direct cable external links; or implanted circumvascular acoustic radiators.
C. Electromagnetic Inmessaging — broadcasts from external rf
and microwave sources including epidermally-placed electrodes
(Section 4.7.1); optical laser arrays pressed against the skin; ingestible
radiosondes638 and radio telemetry pills;3333 whole-body electrical
current flows including transosteal intercellular transmissions;
transdermal multi-tesla oscillating magnetic fields; electromagnetic
emanations from implanted rf or microwave emitter organs under
external control; or direct linkages to internal networks via permanent
transdermal access ports.
D. Cable Inmessaging and Message Depots — information may be
transported directly into the body through chemical, acoustic,
electrical, optical, or mechanical cables or tethers feeding implanted
communications organs, message depots, data distribution centers
or bulletin boards; such depots may have biocompatible termini in
the bloodstream, brain, or intercellular regions to facilitate message
exchanges with mobile nanorobots.
E. Eavesdropping — continuous nanorobot monitoring of normal
physiological sensory traffic (imported by human sensory organs)
with specific sensitivity to defined control or keyed patterns that
might have been inserted into the natural data stream, such as
modulated visual, auditory, or tactile cues, periodic dermal pain or
temperature sensations, or oscillating taste and scent signals.
F. Macrosensing — external modulation of physiological or
environmental parameters which can be directly sensed by in vivo
nanorobots but controlled by external agencies, including
pharmacologically-modulated heartbeat or respiration rate, mental
alertness or stage of sleep, atmospheric humidity or pressure, chemical
composition of the air, gravity or centrifugal acceleration, particulate
radiation flux, or geographical position and altitude (see Section
4.9).
7.4.2 Inmessaging from Patient or User
Autogenous command and control (Chapter 12) gives a patient
or user the ability to issue instructions directly to nanodevices present
in his or her body. Patient or user inmessaging is an important
enabling technology for autogenous control, wherein a human
being manipulates a consciously controlled variable, which
manipulation is then detectable by in vivo nanodevices. Once the
message is received by even a single nanorobot, the information
may be rapidly multiplied and passed along to other nanorobots
using an internal communications network.
7.4.2.1 Mechanical Inmessaging
Perhaps the simplest example of user inmessaging is
finger-drumming on a hard surface such as a tabletop, a method
which we will now examine in some detail. A ~15 gm finger may be
drummed at a maximum of ~5 Hz920,921 over a 2 cm path length at
a maximum velocity of ~0.2 m/sec; if the impacting finger is brought
to a halt within 1 mm of the ~1 cm2 fingertip and ~50% of the
kinetic energy is converted into acoustic energy, the phalangeal
impact produces a maximum compression wave of ~0.3 atm (~300
watts/m2
). The lightest audible tapping produces a pressure wave of
~0.01 atm (~0.3 watts/m2
). Either pulse is easily detectable by ~10-6
atm-sensitive nanorobot acoustic sensors (Section 4.5.1) located in
the patient’s hand or arm.
Consider five sensor-equipped nanorobots each positioned ~2 mm
below the epidermis in the soft tissue just beyond the distal phalanx
of five different fingers, and each with access to a local communications network (Section 7.3) spanning the hand. An impact pulse
applied to a given finger reaches the sensor stationed in that finger
in ~1 microsec by conduction through soft tissue at ~1540 m/sec.
The acoustic pulse then travels down the phalanges and metacarpals,
crosses the distal row of carpals, then travels back up through the
metacarpals and phalanges of the other fingers mostly via bone
conduction at ~3550 m/sec (Table 6.7), reaching the adjacent
sensors 90-110 microsec after the initial impact. The pulse does
not travel exclusively in bone as it must pass through 8-11
Fig. 7.2. Bones of the right hand, palmar surface (modified from
Millard, King, and Showers750).
190 Nanomedicine • Volume I
diarthrodial articulations (see Figs. 7.2, 8.25). Approximating each
as a bone/soft-tissue interface with R = 66% reflection loss across each
interface (Section 6.4.1), the 0.01-0.3 atm pressure pulse is reduced
by at most 10-4, still detectable even at the lightest tapping pressure.
Assuming nanorobots may possess synchronized internal clocks
with at least 1-10 microsec accuracy (Section 10.1), then data sharing
of pulse arrival times among the five nanorobots via the network
allows the reconstruction of five unique temporal signatures of an
impact event at any particular finger (Table 7.1). Conduction also
occurs through soft tissue pathways which may be ~15 cm shorter
than the typical osteal path length (Xpath) used in Table 7.1, and
may also produce much less signal attenuation. These soft-tissue
pulses arrive ~120-160 microsec post-impact because of the slower
conduction speed and thus should not be confused with the osteal
signal. Still other pathways with widely varying conduction velocities
will increase noise levels, but a brief training session should produce
acceptable signal/noise ratios for event recognition especially since
maximum pulse extinction time (~200 microsec) << pulse repetition
time at ~5 Hz (~0.2 sec).
Interphalangeal amplitude attenuation provides an additional
check on the identity of the tapping finger. An impact deceleration
in ~5 x 10-3 sec produces a single ~5 millisec pulse (~200 Hz) which
from Eqn. 4.52 attenuates from 10,000 x 10-6 atm to at most 9997
x 10-6 atm over a ~20 cm path length through soft tissue, or to at
most ~9900 x 10-6 atm over a ~35 cm path length through bone—
either of which is detectable by nanorobot acoustic sensors sensitive
to changes of ~1 x 10-6 atm.
With single-finger coding, each tap represents log2(5) = 2.32
bits/tap; a maximum tapping rate (~5 Hz) for each of the five fingers
simultaneously (e.g., playing Rimsky-Korsakov’s “Flight of the
Bumblebee” on the piano) gives a maximum capacity of ~58 bits/sec.
Multifinger coding is slower, since each tap becomes a 5-digit
binary word representing log2(31) = 4.95 bits/tap, and a maximum
multifinger tap rate of ~5 Hz gives a maximum capacity of ~25
bits/sec, about the same as Quastler’s result.1265 The practical limit
for this modality is probably 1-50 bits/sec, roughly 2-100 English
words/min or 10-500 decimal digits/min. Experiments by the MIT
Wearable Computers Group with one-handed chorded keyboards
(such as The Twiddler, manufactured by HandyKey1595) suggest a
requirement of ~5 minutes of training to learn the alphabet, ~1
hour to learn to touch type, and ~3 days to reach ~10 words/minute.
Many conceptually similar methods of mechanical inmessaging
may be employed by a patient whose in vivo nanorobots have been
appropriately programmed and positioned, including clapping/
slapping of hands/feet (~3 bits/sec), mandibular clicking (~2 bits/sec),
tongue-tapping on palate (~2 bits/sec), eyelid or eyebrow flapping (~2
bits/sec), dental/dermal drumming using a rigid
object (~1 bit/sec), epiglottal pulsing (~1 bit/sec), thoracoabdominal
diaphragmatic contractions (~1 bit/sec), or toe tapping (~0.5 bit/
sec).
Other mechanical stimuli at the skin—including pressure, touch,
vibration, and tickle (see Schmidt1633)—may also be eavesdropped
by medical nanorobots. Interestingly, the frequency response of these
receptors may range as high as 800 Hz for Pacinian corpuscles (sensory
organs located at the skeletal joints, tendons, and in the muscles;1634
Table 7.3). Thus an eavesdropping subdermal nanorobot could
receive 100 Hz modulated signals through this channel that would
only be perceived as “flat stimulus” by the conscious human
patient.
7.4.2.2 Kinesthetic Inmessaging
With the support of an internal communications and navigational
network, proprioceptive nanosensors resident in selected human
tissues permit the direct detection of gross limb positions, limb
velocities, and body orientation in space with tmeas ~ 10-3 sec or
better (Sections 4.9.2 and 8.3.3). Thus, for example, data may be
rapidly inmessaged using a highly literal manual sign language3297
designed for minimum ambiguity and maximum precision, with a
minimum number of discrete symbols to memorize. (Native American
sign language has ~400 root signs and other gestural languages have
~2000 signs,731 though a manual alphabet is also used.) Fingers and
limbs can be comfortably moved at 0.1-1 m/sec; if ~1-cm positional
increments can be adequately controlled by a patient and thus can
be employed to convey one bit of information, then the maximum
channel capacity of signing is 10-100 bits/sec per finger or 100-1000
bits/sec for all ten fingers. This estimate compares favorably with
the ~100 bits/sec achieved by hearing-impaired signers translating
speech at a conversational rate of ~150 words/min, and also with
the record manual typing speed of 216 words/minute (~173 bits/
sec) achieved on an IBM Selectric typewriter.739 Nanorobots may
also eavesdrop on proprioceptive information detected by Pacinian
proprioceptors.
Table 7.1. Temporal Signature of a Detectable Mechanical Pulse Conducted Mostly through Bone, which is Applied to One
Finger and Received by Nanorobot Sensors Distally Located in Each of the Five Fingers of the Hand
Mechanical pulse is applied to finger (tapping finger):
Finger #1 Finger #2 Finger #3 Finger #4 Finger #5
(Thumb) (Index) (Bird) (Ring) (Little)
Pulse is detected Arrival Arrival Arrival Arrival Arrival
by sensor on Xpath Time Xpath Time Xpath Time Xpath Time Xpath Time
finger #: (cm) (µsec) (cm) (µsec) (cm) (µsec) (cm) (µsec) (cm) (µsec)
1 0.2 1 34.3 97 37.5 106 39.5 111 38.7 109
2 34.3 97 0.2 1 34.8 98 36.5 103 36.8 104
3 37.5 106 34.8 98 0.2 1 34.3 97 35.3 99
4 39.5 111 36.5 103 34.3 97 0.2 1 32.3 91
5 38.7 109 36.8 104 35.3 99 32.3 91 0.2 1
Basic Capabilities • Communication 191
Properly monitored voluntary large body motions such as
break-dancing or karate programs, or lesser displacements such as
head rolling or shrugging movements, leg jiggling or calisthenic
exercises, rapid periodic lung inflations, anal sphincter contractions,
blinking or eyeball rotations can similarly transfer useful information
into the body at ~1 bit/sec. In combination with real-time retinal
displays (Section 7.4.6.5), eyeball movement nanosensors can
allow patients to use their eyes as an “ocular mouse” to point to an
icon or array of alphanumeric characters superimposed on the
visual field. This will allow them to initiate a programmed function
or to spell out words or numbers. In 1997, an analogous system,
known as the Ocular Vergence and Accommodation Sensor (OVAS)
manufactured by Applied Modern Technologies Corp. of Garden
Grove, California, used 12.5 W/m2 IR laser beams reflected from
each eye’s retina to provide information about eye movement and
other biometric data. The OVAS design included a 12-component
optics system and a Pentium processor with algorithms for processing
data on the accommodative state, movements, and vergence of the
eyes, as well as 10 other ocular functions.1295 In 1998, Canon EOS
cameras used eye-control focus sensors to detect where in the frame
the photographer was looking, and autofocus there, instead of
defaulting to the center of the frame. Superimposing retinal displays
over normal vision need not prove confusing to the patient.
Experiments with head-mounted displays show identical ergonomic
efficiency and accuracy for pointing tasks when control characters
are projected either on a dark background screen or on a translucent
background through which moderately distracting objects and
moving traffic are visible.1307
7.4.2.3 Acoustic Inmessaging
A wide variety of sounds may be generated voluntarily by the
patient and be detected by in vivo nanorobots, such as coughing,
grunting, humming, various other mechanical body noises (Section
4.9.1.4) and even vocalizations including direct voice commands
spoken aloud by the user (Section 4.9.1.5); 1-100 bit/sec inmessaging
rates appear feasible by these methods. Intracochlear nanodevices
can also be used for high-capacity inmessaging (Section 7.4.6.3).
Soundless subvocalizations may also be detected using kinesthetic
techniques (Section 7.4.2.2) to measure ~0.5 mm movements in
tongue position and the muscles of the larynx that produce adjacent
distinguishable tones in the vocal cords. The triangular waveform
harmonics emitted by the larynx are modified during passage through
sub- and supraglottal cavities, the shape of which may be voluntarily
altered by submillimeter muscular movements — again, well within
the range that nanorobots can detect (Section 4.9.2.1). Data sharing by
multiple nanorobots using a communication network should permit
reconstruction and estimation of the intended vocalization with
sufficient reliability to transfer useful noncritical data or commands
into the network. In 1998, radar microchips operating at ~2 GHz
were already used for soundless speech recognition—the system
recognized and interpreted motions of the human glottis, lips,
tongue, jaw, and velum in real time.1648
The field of voice recognition is active, and no systematic review
will be attempted here.1654-1658,1710 In 1998, IBM’s speech recognition
technology, including the Voice Type Dictation and Personal Dictation
systems (IPDS), was well-known and commercially available,1659,1660
as was Kurzweil’s VoiceCommands and VoicePro3131 and
NaturallySpeaking from Dragon Systems.3132
7.4.2.4 Chemical Inmessaging
Ingestion or inhalation of chemical messenger molecules is another
way the patient can control the flow of information and commands
into his body. The patient could provide the desired data or commands
to a desktop manufacturing appliance, which appliance then encodes
the information onto billions of copies of a hydrofluorocarbon
messenger molecule suspended in a carrier fluid or solid pill, which
the patient subsequently inhales or ingests. Messages up to ~109
bits may be distributed throughout the body in ~one circulation
time (~60 sec), a data transfer rate up to ~107 bits/sec. Patients
without access to personal manufacturing appliances could be given
fluid ampules, standardized pill sets or inhalers whose contents are
designed to trigger specific predetermined nanorobot behaviors. Such
sets must contain personal security codes to prevent their unauthorized
use on other patients (see Chapter 12).
A related technique for chemical inmessaging is to allow naturally
inhaled or ingested molecules (e.g., gustation or olfaction) to trigger
specific nanorobot actions. For example, if continuously circulating
detoxification nanorobots are programmed to begin removing alcohol
from the bloodstream whenever the presence of garlic compounds
is detected, then the patient can voluntarily trigger the detox response
by sniffing or chewing a clove of garlic. (A population of 1012
bloodborne nanodevices with aggregate storage volume ~6 cm3 can
reduce serum alcohol from 0.2% to 0.005% in ~1 second by prompt
onboard sequestration, followed by metabolization of the entire
inventory in ~10 minutes within a systemic caloric budget of ~200
watts, although outflows from ethanol-soaked body tissues into the
bloodstream and other factors complicate the process; see Chapters
19 and 25.) Similarly, nanorobots with selected chemical sensors
stationed in the vomeronasal organ,1971 vallate papillae or olfactory
epithelium could directly detect and respond to specific flavors,
perfumes, pheromones1972 or other chemical substances—even
molecules which humans are normally incapable of tasting or
smelling, including artificial or engineered substances.
Binary message sequences employing the five basic gustatory
stimuli (Section 7.4.6.4) must use one of the stimuli as a positional
spacer to avoid confusion. For example, a patient sipping the 8-taste
sequence “sweet (1), salty (/), sweet (1), salty (/), sour (0), salty (/),
sweet (1), salty (/)” has just transferred the binary sequence “1101”
into his body. (“Salty” is used as the spacer because salt sensitivity is
most widely distributed over the surface of the tongue. “Sour” is
used because saltiness partially suppresses perception of bitterness,
and because sweet and bitter taste messages are transmitted by the
same transducer protein, called α-gustducin.) This inmessaging
modality is probably limited to ~0.1 bit/sec but may be boosted
considerably by employing complex artificial gustatory stimuli (akin
to messenger molecules) which only lingually-embedded nanorobot
sensors can detect.
Human olfactory receptors can probably detect ~1000 different
smells (Section 7.4.6.4); exposure to a new olfactory stimulus every
1-10 seconds, with each smell worth log2(1000) = 10 bits/symbol,
allows information transfer up to ~1-10 bits/sec. Individual chemical
assay nanorobots that can detect ~107
 different molecules (Section
4.2.4) allow greater diversity and specificity of signal carriers, but at
most only ~double the bit rate because log2(107
) = 23 bits/symbol.
However, the bit rate using long-chain digitally coded artificial
messenger molecules is vastly higher, and probably only
thermogenically (heat of manufacture and access; Sections 7.2.1.8
and 7.2.6) and biocompatibility (Chapter 15) limited.
7.4.2.5 Electromagnetic and Thermal Inmessaging
The human body does not emit voluntary electrical or electromagnetic radiation except for modest dermal potentials associated
with ECGs and EEGs which probably cannot be directly detected
by individual in vivo nanorobots (Section 7.2.3). Simple voluntary
192 Nanomedicine • Volume I
actions that might allow electromagnetic inmessaging to
subdermally-implanted nanorobots include placing a hand near a
heated stove, then pulling it away; or blinking a flashlight beam on
and off while the flashlight is pressed against the skin, for nanorobots
positioned at most 1-2 cm below the epidermis (Section 4.9.4); or
moving a bar magnet across a patch of skin (Section 4.7.2)—all
allowing ~0.1-1 bit/sec transfer rates. A thermographic system might
also detect the slightly elevated dermal temperature caused by touching
a hand to the face or thigh, much like a simple demarcation strategy
(Section 8.4.1).
7.4.2.6 Neural Inmessaging
The most comprehensive inmessaging capability may be afforded
by eavesdropping on selected neural sensory traffic (Section 4.9.5).
Noninvasive monitoring of neuroelectric impulses (Section 4.8.6)
by nanorobots stationed near afferent neurons can detect and interpret
any sensory stimulus that can be consciously perceived by the patient.
Virtually every inmessaging stimulus described elsewhere in Section
7.4.2—including finger-drumming, hand-signing, vocalized or
olfactory signals, dermal heat sensations, scalp/eyebrow
myopotentials, and the like—may be indirectly detected by suitably
positioned and configured neural monitors. For instance,
finger-tapping generates electrical activity in a specific ~1 cm2 patch
of neurons in the primary motor cortex1090—although nanorobots
suitably positioned in the brachial plexus, or lower in the tree near
critical junctions of the median nerve (above the digital, thumb,
and palmar cutaneous branches) and the ulnar nerve (above the
muscular, dorsal cutaneous, superficial palmar and deep palmar
branches), may achieve more rapid and reliable monitoring of
motor impulses. Neurons may fire at >100 Hz, so, ignoring significant
electrical spike redundancy, inmessaging rates up to ~100 bits/sec
per monitored neuron can in theory be achieved with this approach.
Nonsensory volitional neural inmessaging channels are also
available to nanorobot monitors stationed in the brain. For example,
by consciously recalling a specific series of numbers, letters, names,
words, concepts, images, or events, a well-defined constellation of
neural impulses of certain frequencies may be caused to pass
repeatably through the same, say, (~200 micron)3 blocks of brain
tissue for each recalled item. Brain tissue contains numerous
“dominance columns” on approximately this scale which appear to
represent functionally associated fiber bundles.1036,1039 For example,
300-500 micron wide columns have been described in the striate
and inferotemporal cortex of the macaque monkey;742,1037 organized
patterns of action potential waves have been observed via calcium
imaging in rodents, measuring 100-300 microns wide in the retina
and ~50 microns wide in the cortex.771 An experiment using a
context-recall memory task in monkeys suggested that an ensemble
of as few as 16 motor cortical cells could perfectly classify (i.e., 100%
accuracy) all the items in a sequence of five stimuli ;3184 nanorobotic
monitors stationed at those 16 cells could in theory discriminate all
five-stimulus sequences.
Thus, without being able to understand any of the higher-order
meanings of these signals (e.g., to “read human thoughts”),
nanorobots detecting such reproducibly neurographically-localized
impulse trains may pool their readings and interpret specific
combinations of such localized trains as data or as command strings
(a ~0.1-1 bit/sec channel) and then take appropriate action.
Biofeedback monitors,1661 volitional scalp EEG multiband user interfaces, PET scanners and functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) operate on a crudely analogous principle, but without the
benefit of precise impulse localization that is made possible by
molecular nanotechnology. In 1998, a glass cone electrode filled
with neurotrophic factors (which encouraged neural ingrowth) was
implanted in a patient’s motor cortex; the patient learned to mentally
operate the output signal as a binary switch.3074 Another system
using cortical potentials achieved transfer rates of ~2 characters/
min. 3121
7.4.2.7 Macroscale Inmessaging Transducers
Inmessaging signals from patient to nanorobot may also be
mediated using macroscale communications interfaces. These
interfaces may be fixed or mobile, and may be either stable or
reconfigurable. A crude example of a fixed, stable inmessaging
transducer would be a ~1 cm dermally- or cranially-mounted
coaxial cable connector which allows data to flow into an implanted
dedicated communication organ for subsequent distribution to in
vivo nanodevices via an internal communications network. Data
passes into the patient through a simple rf or microwave coax cable
which is plugged directly into the patient’s socket, readily achieving
~1010 bit/sec transfer rates (Section 7.2.5.1) directed from a computer
operated by the patient or physician. Up to ~1013 bit/sec transfers
are available using fiberoptic (Section 7.2.5.2) or chemocable
(Section 7.2.5.5) ports. Other fixed transducers may incorporate
photoelectric or olfactory sensors, microphones, neural taps, or
manipulable tactile elements such as buttons or switches.
At the other extreme of maximum inmessaging versatility, a dermal
transducer may be configured upon request and presented to the
patient on any part of his body. For example, a tattoo-like ~30 cm2
dermal control panel comprised of ~3 billion communication-linked
kinesthetically-sensitive chromomorphic nanorobots spaced ~5
microns apart could be assembled under a clear flat patch of epidermis
such as the back of the hand. This panel could take the shape of a
touch-sensitive alphanumeric keypad resembling a laptop computer
keyboard or a touch-tone telephone or home-security keypad,
complete with a touch-sensitive grid of visually-readable inscribed
characters. (See details in Section 7.4.6.7.) Similarly, a
wristwatch-shaped device could accept accept and interpret verbal
commands, then translate them into modulated electromagnetic
signals displayed on a 2-D array of photodiodes or microlasers on
the back of the watch; the signals could then be received by a
nanorobot dermal transducer panel (Section 7.4.6.7) and passed
along to the rest of the in vivo network.
7.4.3 Intradevice Messaging
Intradevice messaging has already been briefly described in the
context of metamorphic control (Section 5.3.3), lengthy gear trains
(Section 6.3.2), sliding and rotating control rods (Section 7.2.4), acoustic
transmission lines (Section 7.2.5.3), and mechanical cables (Section
7.2.5.4), and does not appear to present any major fundamental or
conceptual difficulties.
To summarize, internal communications within an individual
nanorobot may be achieved by impressing modulated low-pressure
acoustical spikes on the hydraulic working fluid of the power
distribution system, or by mechanically actuating simple networks
of rods and couplings, easily achieving transfer rates of >109 bits/
sec.10 Single-channel mechanical, hydraulic or acoustic cables ~10
nm in diameter can be bundled together into a flexible 100-nm
diameter 100-channel data bus suitable for controlling flexible
manipulators or for maintaining control during metamorphic shape
shifts; nested doped buckytube fibers could provide a similar multiplicity of electrical conduction channels. Internal fluid chambers
can distribute pressure actuation signals in the manner of the latching
ratchet/pawl and vernier ratchet threshold-active pressure actuator
mechanisms proposed by Drexler.10
Basic Capabilities • Communication 193
7.4.4 Interdevice Messaging
Physically-linked nanomachines may communicate with each
other through their tethers or network connections. Messaging
between physically separated in vivo nanodevices will normally take
place via acoustic or chemical, and occasionally mechanical or optical,
modalities.
Interdevice communications has been extensively discussed in
both free-tissue (broadcast) and cable contexts for chemical messaging
(Sections 7.2.1 and 7.2.5.5), acoustic messaging (Sections 7.2.2 and
7.2.5.3), electromagnetic messaging (Sections 7.2.3 and 7.2.5.1-2),
mechanical tapping and cable messaging (Sections 7.2.4 and 7.2.5.4),
metamorphic surface reconfigurations (Section 5.3.2.5) and network
configurations (Section 7.3). The general conclusion is that
untethered free nanorobots will typically have maximum interdevice
communication ranges on the order of ~100-200 microns;
interdevice messaging much beyond that distance probably must
be handled by a local or wide-area communications network.
7.4.5 Biocellular Messaging
Nanodevices can also directly communicate with cells by
intercepting, modulating, or initiating the flow of natural chemical
messenger molecules. Because cells are the fundamental unit of
biological organization, it is useful first to examine the various
modalities of cellular chemical communication in general terms
(Section 7.4.5.1). Properly designed and positioned nanodevices
can receive chemical messages from cells (Section 7.4.5.2), send
chemical messages into cells (Section 7.4.5.3), modulate natural
cellular message traffic (Section 7.4.5.4), or communicate directly
with neurons (Sections 7.4.5.5 and 7.4.5.6). Information can also
be transferred mechanically into the cell via links between the
extracellular matrix (ECM) and the cytoskeleton in ways that have
yet to be fully elucidated.942
7.4.5.1 Natural Cellular Communications
Cells communicate chemically with each other in two ways—
contact signaling and secretory signaling. In the first category, chemical
messages may be passed between cells in direct contact through gap
junctions that directly join the cytoplasms of the interacting cells
(Section 5.4.2). As in the case of foreign or self-antigen presentation
(Sections 5.3.6 and 8.5.2.1), cells may also display
plasma-membrane-bound molecules on their surfaces which may be
“read” by other cells that come into physical contact with them. Signals
may also be transduced into cells directly from the ECM.942,984-986
In the second category—the principal focus of this Section—
there are four basic classes of secretory signaling molecules in the
human body, as described briefly below and incompletely listed in
Table 7.2. Normal human bloodstream concentrations of some of
these molecules are given in Appendix B. At least several hundred
different chemical messengers are known to be used in the human
body, and many thousands may exist. Biologist Dennis Bray of
Cambridge University believes that up to ~50% of the human
genome may code for proteins involved in cell signaling,776 but
10%-20% for “classical” communication pathways is probably more
reasonable. For example, the now-sequenced 97-megabase genome
of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has ~19,099 protein-coding
genes,3138 of which ~11% are involved in signal transduction and
another ~11% in transport and secretion .3139
The first class of secretory signaling molecules is comprised of
the endocrine hormones, which are usually secreted by exocytosis
and travel through the bloodstream to distant target cells (e.g., “volume
transmission”) where they act as direct effectors on cell activity. For
example, a steroid hormone, upon entering a target cell, binds to a
complementary receptor protein. Binding induces conformational
changes in the receptor and activates it, increasing the receptor’s
affinity for DNA and allowing it in turn to bind to specific genes in
the nucleus, thus directly regulating their transcription.3140 This
process is extremely wasteful because many activated receptors bind
to DNA at sites where their presence has no effect;531 Lewin997 notes
that activated receptors have a tenfold increased affinity for nonspecific
DNA.
The second class consists of local chemical mediators or
paracrines, which travel only a short distance (up to ~1 mm) to
neighboring cellular targets. This group also includes the autocrines
which act upon a cell’s own receptors, such as the prostaglandins
which are made by cells in all tissues. The single largest group in
this class is the cytokines. Cytokines are soluble proteins or glycoproteins, produced by leukocytes and other cell types, which act as
chemical communicators between cells but not as effector molecules
in their own right.767 Cytokines include secretory peptides formerly
classified as lymphokines, monokines, interferons,
colony-stimulating factors, chemotactic factors and growth factors;
over 150 different cytokines had been cloned by 1998.
The third class of chemical signaling molecules is the neurotransmitters, including the 60+ known neuropeptides (typically up to
30-40 residues long), which mediate communications between nerve
cells and other cells. Interestingly, a single neurotransmitter signaling
molecule may have different effects on different target cells. For
instance, acetylcholine stimulates the contraction of skeletal muscle
cells but decreases the contraction rate and force in heart muscle
cells.531 The immune and neuroendocrine systems produce and
respond to similar signal molecules (e.g., neuropeptides and
cytokines). Neuropeptides have been shown to effect immune
responses through their influence on cytokine production and
action, and cytokines are known to induce or influence the production
of peptidergic messenger substances.768
The fourth class is the intracellular messengers, also known as
intracellular mediators or second messenger substances. While small
hydrophobic signaling molecules like the steroids and thyroid
hormones pass through the cell membrane and activate receptor
proteins inside the cell, hydrophilic signaling molecules such as
neurotransmitters, most hormones and local chemical mediators
activate receptor proteins on the surface of the target cell. (Cell
surface receptors for these signaling molecules may be either diffusely
distributed or localized to specific regions of the membrane, and
their number can vary from 500 to more than 100,000 per cell for
a specific ligand.) Because cell surface receptors cannot regulate gene
expression directly, they must emit a second messenger molecule
into the cytosol which can then trigger the desired regulatory
action. Cyclic AMP (cAMP), an intracellular messenger that tells
certain types of cells to break down their glycogen stores in response
to receipt of epinephrine at the cell surface, is perhaps the best-known
example (Section 7.4.5.4). Another example is the voltage-gated
Ca++ ion channel (Sections 3.3.3 and 7.4.5.3), which participates
in nerve pulse events but also in signal transduction via the
inositol-phospholipid pathway for more than 25 different types of
cell surface receptors of hormonal signals.531 For instance,
excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle cells requires the
release of Ca++ ions through ryanodine receptor channels in the SR
(sarcoplasmic reticulum; Section 8.5.3.5), each of which opens to
provide 4-8 picoamp Ca++ ion currents in 1-2 millisec bursts, through
the SR membrane.1965
194 Nanomedicine • Volume I
7.4.5.2 Inmessaging from Cells
Nanodevices can receive the natural chemical messages transmitted
from and between cells simply by eavesdropping on the natural
molecular message traffic. (Of course, mechanical (e.g., cytoskeletal)
and electrical (e.g., ionic) cellular emanations may also be detectable by
nanodevices.)
For instance, consider a ~0.1 micromole puff of epinephrine (aka
adrenalin, C9H13NO3, MW = 183 daltons) released into the human
bloodstream from cells in the adrenal medulla located above the
kidneys. Epinephrine is an emergency hormone emitted in response
to stressful conditions which acts to increase heart rate, decrease the
blood flow to the gut, increase blood flow to skeletal muscles, increase
circulation of oxygen and nutrients to other organs, and mobilize
the production of metabolic fuels such as fatty acids and glucose
(by causing liver and muscle cells to break down glycogen)—
establishing the primitive mammalian “fight or flight” response.
As bloodstream concentrations rise over 1-10 sec to a peak of
cligand ~ 10-8 molecules/nm3 (Appendix B), then from Eqn. 4.3 a
bloodborne nanorobot with a single epinephrine chemical sensor
having just ~0.4 nm2 of active surface area can detect the peak
concentration in tEQ ~ 0.3 sec. A patch of 260 such receptors
measuring ~500 nm2 in total physical surface area can detect the
peak concentration within ~1 millisec of its occurrence, or can
detect 10% of peak concentration within 10 millisec from the start
of the ramp-up. Epinephrine and most other signaling molecules
cannot be directly measured by nanorobots stationed within the
cytosol because the molecule is hydrophilic and cannot pass through
the cellular membrane (unlike the steroids). For the most rapid
possible response to changing hormone levels, chemosensor-equipped
nanorobots should be positioned on or inside the cells and organs
which produce specific signals of interest, with the results of positive
detections of increased activity quickly passed along through the in
vivo communications network (Section 7.3).
For the rarest cytokines or steroid hormones present at cligand ~
10-12 molecules/nm3 in the bloodstream or cytosol (equivalent to
~8 molecules inside one (20 micron)3 tissue cell or ~1 molecule
inside a single leukocyte), a ~5000 nm2 sensor patch containing
~100 individual receptors (each having ~6 nm2 of active area) can
register a detection in ~10 sec for a single cytosol-based nanorobot.
However, cellular signaling molecules are more commonly present
in the cytosol at ~10-8 molecule/nm3 levels,531 enabling ~1 millisec
detections using this sensor configuration. By comparison, the typical
target tissue cell has ~10,000 steroid receptors (each binding one
steroid molecule) floating in the cytosol.
Nanodevices may also eavesdrop on morphogenic signals. For
example, simple changes in the extracellular protease/antiprotease
concentration ratio (which causes endothelial cells to detach from
their parent vessel and invade their underlying stroma during
angiogenesis) are readily detected using chemical nanosensors.
Continuous monitoring of the relevant natural cytokine traffic can
help nanorobots maintain a complete picture of current cellular
activities and states. Indeed, the principal design challenge is likely
to be sensory traffic data management rather than sensor speed or
specificity. Living cells are awash in a sea of messages from hormones,
cytokines, growth factors, and a host of other message-carrying
molecules, all of which must be transmitted through complex chemical
networks of intermediates and multiple signal pathways into the
cell’s interior.
7.4.5.3 Outmessaging to Cells
Individual micron-scale nanorobots have insufficient chemical
release volume or manufacturing capacity to transmit endocrine-like
chemical signals throughout the entire bloodstream (Section 7.2.1.8),
although simultaneous coordinated chemical releases may be made
from large numbers of in vivo nanomachines for special purposes.
Nanodevice outmessaging to cells thus will normally be limited to
localized paracrine-like, neurotransmitter, or intracellular messaging,
and of course nucleic molecules which may have a direct control
function. Indeed, the most efficient outmessaging to cells may
involve the assembly of customized RNA molecules or their antisense
variants (using locally available raw materials such as RNA bases
and amino acids) to up- or down-regulate specific gene activities
(Chapter 12) thus taking advantage of the cell’s inherent amplification
by the ribosomes.
As a simple example, Ca++ serves as an intracellular mediator in
a wide variety of cell responses including secretion, cell proliferation,
neurotransmission, cellular metabolism (when complexed to
calmodulin), and signal cascade events that are regulated by
calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinases and adenylate
cyclases. The concentration of free Ca++ in the extracellular fluid or
in the cell’s internal calcium sequestering compartment (which is
loaded with a binding protein called calsequestrin) is ~10-3 ions/
nm.3 However, in the cytosol, free Ca++ concentration varies from 6
x 10-8 ions/nm3 for a resting cell up to 3 x 10-6 ions/nm3 when the
cell is activated by an extracellular signal; cytosolic levels > 10-5 ions/
nm3 may be toxic,531 e.g., via apoptosis (Sections 10.4.1.1 and
10.4.2.1).
To transmit an artificial Ca++ activation signal to a typical tissue
cell in ~1 millisec, a single nanorobot stationed in the cytoplasm
must promptly raise the cytosolic ion count from 480,000 Ca++
ions to 24 million Ca++ ions, a transfer rate of ~2.4 x 1010 ions/sec
which may be accomplished using ~24,000 molecular sorting rotors
(Section 3.4.2) operated in reverse, requiring a total nanorobot
emission surface area of ~2.4 micron2
. Or, more compactly, pressurized
venting or an ion nozzle may be employed (Section 9.2.7). Onboard
storage volume of ~0.1 micron3 can hold ~2 billion calcium atoms,
enough to transmit ~100 artificial Ca++ signals into the cell after
ionization (2877 zJ/ion double-ionization energy)763 even assuming
no recycling.
In addition to the amplitude modulation (AM) of Ca++ signals
noted above, De Koninck and Schulman1121 have discovered a
mechanism (CaM kinase II) that transduces frequency-modulated
(FM) Ca++ intracellular signals in the range of 0.1-10 Hz. Fine tuning
of the kinase’s activity by both AM and FM signals (either of which
is readily detected or generated by in cyto nanorobots) may occur as
the molecule participates in the control of diverse cellular activities.
Nanorobots may also mechanically outmessage to cells. The
cytoskeleton of living cells and nuclei are hard-wired such that a
mechanical tug on cell surface receptors can immediately change
the organization of molecular structures inside the nucleus and the
cytoplasm942 and can dramatically alter cellular electrical conductivity.1100 The intermediate fiber network (Section 8.5.3.11)
alone is sufficient to transmit mechanical stress to the nucleus.942
The minimum force required to initiate signal transduction may be
as low as ~10 pN (Section 9.4.3.2.1), well within the ~100
nanonewton capacity of the nanomanipulator arm described in
Section 9.3.1.4.
7.4.5.4 Cell Message Modification
Properly configured in cyto nanorobots can modify natural
intracellular message traffic according to preprogrammed rules or
by following external commands issued by the attending physician.
In the case of steroids and thyroid hormones, this may involve the
direct manipulation of the signaling molecules themselves (after they
Basic Capabilities • Communication 195
Table 7.2. The Four Major Classes of Human Cell Secretory Signaling Molecules531,755,767,769
I. Endocrine Hormones II. Local Chemical Mediators III. Neurotransmitters
STEROIDS FATTY ACID DERIVATIVES NEUROTRANSMITTERS
Aldosterone Leukotriene A4(LTA4) Acetylcholine
Catecholestrogens Leukotriene A5 (LTA5) Acetylserotonin
Cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) Leukotriene B (LTB) γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA)
Cortisol (hydrocortisone) Leukotriene C (LTC) Dopamine
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) Leukotriene C5 (LTC5) Glutamic acid
11-Deoxycorticosterone Prostacyclin (PGI2) Glycine
Dihydrotestosterone Prostaglandin A2 (PGA2) Histamine
Estradiol & Estriol Prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) Melatonin
Estrone Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) Nitric Oxide
Progesterone Prostaglandin F1α (PGF1α) Norepinephrine (noradrenaline) (NEP)
Testosterone Prostaglandin F2α (PGF2α) Octopamine
Thromboxane A2 (TXA2) Serotonin
Thromboxane B2 (TXB2)
AMINO ACID DERIVATIVES
Epinephrine (adrenalin) AMINO ACID DERIVATIVES NEUROPEPTIDES
Thyroid Hormone (thyroxine)
Histamine ACTH
Angiotensin II
Bombesin
PEPTIDES AND PROTEINS CYTOKINE FAMILIES (Peptides & Proteins) Bradykinin
Cacitonin
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) Hematopoietin Family: Erythropoietin, Carnosine
Antimullerian hormone IL-2 (Interleukin), IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, Cholecystokinin (CCK, pancreozymin)
Arg-Vasopressin (AVP) IL-9, IL-10, IL-13, G-CSF, GM-CSF Corticotropin Releasing Factor (CRF)
Arg-Vasotocin (Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony Stimulating Dynorphin
Atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) Factor), M-CSF, CNTF, OSM, LIF (Leukemia β-Endorphin
Autoimmune antiinsulin Inhibitory Factor), IFNα (Interferon), IFNβ, IFNγ Enkephalin
Cacitonin (CT) Galanin
Enteroglucagon (GLI) EGF Family: Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF, or Gastrin & Gastrin Releasing Peptide
Follicle-Stimulating hormone (FSH) urogastrone), TGFα (Transforming Growth Factor) GH Releasing Hormone (GHRH)
Gastric Inhibitory Polypeptide (GIP) Glucagon & Insulin
Gastrin β-Trefoil Family: FGFα (Fibroblast Growth Factor), Kyotorphin
GH Releasing Factor (GRF) FGFβ, IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-1Rα LH Releasing Hormone (LHRH)
Growth Hormone (GH, somatotropin) Lipotropin
Glicentin TNF Family: TNFα (Tumor Necrosis Factor), Motilin
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG) TNFβ, LTβ Neurokinin A & B
Human Placental Lactogen (hPL) Neuropeptide Y & P
Inhibin Cysteine Knot Family: NGF (Nerve Growth Neurotensin
Insulin Factor), TGFβ1, TGFβ2, TGFβ3, PDGF (Platelet Oxytocin
Leptin Derived Growth Factor), VEGF (Vascular Proctolin
Lipotropin (LPH) Endothelial Growth Factor) Prolactin (PRL)
Long-Acting Thyroid Stimulator (LATS) Secretin
Luteinizing Hormone (LH) Cheomkine Family: IL-8, MIP-1α (Macrophage Somatostatin
Melanocyte-Stimulating Hormone (MSH) Inflammatory Protein), MIP-1β, MIP-2, PF-4, Substance P
Motilin PBP, I-309/TCA-3, MCP-1, MCP-2, MCP-3, Tachykinins
Osteoclast-Activating Factor (OAF) γIP-10 Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide (VIP)
Ovarian Growth Factor Vasopressin
Pancreatic Glucagon
Pancreatic Polypeptide (PP) Other Cytokines: Angiopoietin, Eosinophil IV. Intracellular Messengers
Parathyroid Hormone (PTH) Chemotactic Factor, Eosinophil Stimulator
Platelet Growth Factor Promoter, Fibrinopeptide B, Insulinlike Growth Arachidonic acid
Proinsulin Factors (IGF), Kallikrein, Leukocyte Inhibitory Ca++ (w/ or w/o calmodulin)
Prolactin-Releasing Factor (PRH) Factor, Lymphocyte Stimulating Factor, Cyclic AMP
Relaxin Macrophage Activating Factor (MAF), Cyclic GMP
Secretin Macrophage Growth Factor (MGF), Macrophage Diacylglycerol
Somatomedins Stimulatory Protein (MSP), Neutrophil Diadenosinetetraphosphate
Thymic Humoral Factor (THF) Chemotactic Factor, Platelet Activating Factor, GTPase-Activating Proteins (GAPs)
Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (TSH) Proliferation Inhibitory Factor, Thrombopoietin Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors (GEFs)
Thyrotropic-Releasing Hormone (TRH) (TPO), Thymopoietin Inositol triphosphate
196 Nanomedicine • Volume I
have passed through the cell membrane) or their bound receptor
complexes. However, most signaling molecules are absorbed at the
cell surface, initiating a signal cascade which must be modulated by
manipulating the second-messenger molecules or other components
of the signal cascade. A complete analysis of the modifications that
nanorobots may impose upon normal intracellular message traffic
is beyond the scope of this book. However, a few basic examples of
modifying action may be illustrated using the familiar cyclic AMP
(cAMP; C10H11N5O6P, MW = 328 daltons) messaging system.
A. Amplification — A single epinephrine molecule received by a
β adrenergic receptor at a cell surface transduces the activation of
dozens of G-protein α subunits, each of which in turn activates a
single adenylate cyclase enzyme which cyclizes hundreds of ATP
molecules into cAMP molecules. The intracellular population of
cAMP (in muscle or liver target cells) is normally  10-6 M or ~5
million molecules for a typical (20 micron)3 tissue cell. Stimulation
by epinephrine raises the cAMP population to ~25 million molecules
in a few seconds. Upon detecting this rising tide of cAMP in a few
millisec, a single in cyto nanorobot could amplify this existing
chemical signal by instantly releasing 20 million cAMP molecules
(occupying ~0.01 micron3
) from onboard inventories—decreasing
cellular response time by several orders of magnitude.*
B. Suppression — Similarly, upon detection of rising cAMP levels in
target cells, resident nanorobots could use molecular rotors to rapidly
remove cAMP from the cytosol as quickly as it is formed, even
under maximum adrenal stimulation. From Eqn. 3.4 the
diffusion-limited intake current at the basal concentration (~6 x 10-7
molecules/nm3
) for a cAMP-absorbing spherical nanodevice 1
micron in radius is ~4 million molecules/sec, so a single such device
could probably keep up with natural cAMP production rates and
thus completely extinguish the response by preserving a flat basal
concentration. (As a practical matter, it may be more efficient to
simply control epinephrine generation at its glandular source
unless it is desired to interface with just a single tissue type.)
Simultaneously, the cAMP-absorbing nanorobot may hydrolyze the
stored cAMP (hydrolysis energy is ~11.1 Kcal/mole or ~77.1 zJ/molecule)3298 in the manner of the cAMP phosphodiesterases (c.f.
nanofactories, Chapter 19), then excrete these deactivated AMP
messenger molecules back into the cytosol. Similar methods might
be useful in ligand-gated ion channel desensitization or in disease
symptom suppression (Chapter 24)—as for example, in suppressing
the prolonged elevation of cAMP in intestinal epithelial cells associated
with the cholera toxin, that produces severe diarrhea by causing a
large influx of water into the gut.
C. Replacement — Combining suppression and amplification,
an existing chemical signal may be eliminated and replaced by a
different—even an opposite—message pathway using nanorobot
mediators. Alternative pathways may be natural or wholly synthetic.
Novel responses to existing signals may be established within the
cell to enhance functionality or to improve stability or controllability.
For example, detection of one species of cytokine by a nanorobot
could trigger rapid specific absorption of that cytokine and a
simultaneous fast release of another (different) species of cytokine
in its place. Such procedures must take into account the redundant
signaling pathways and backup systems (e.g., developmental signals,
immune system, blood clotting). Medical nanorobotics will allow
the replacement of many redundant pathways with more refined
and specific responses.
D. Linkage — Previously unlinked signal cascades may be
artificially linked using in cyto nanodevices. As a fanciful example,
the receipt of epinephrine by nanorobots located in the capillaries
of the brain could trigger these devices to suppress the adrenalin
response while simultaneously releasing chemical messengers producing message cascades that stimulate production of enkephalins
or other opioids, thus encouraging a state of psychological relaxation
rather than the “fight or flight” response to certain stressful conditions.
7.4.5.5 Inmessaging from Neurons
Inmessaging from neurons to nanodevices has already been
considered in Sections 4.8.6, 4.9.5 and 7.4.2.6. In these discussions, it
was concluded that at least half a dozen different methods should
permit nanorobot sensors to noninvasively detect, measure, and
count the passage of nerve impulses. Neurographics,
neuroinformatics,1298 connectivity mapping and individual neural
targeting are described in Chapter 25.
7.4.5.6 Outmessaging to Neurons
In vivo nanorobots can outmessage to neurons as well. The most
direct method is synaptic stimulation. In excitory cholinergic synapses,
perhaps the most common type, the arrival of a presynaptic nerve
impulse stimulates the release of up to ~105 molecules of acetylcholine
(C7H16NO2, MW = 146 daltons) from synaptic vesicles into the
synaptic cleft in ~1 millisec, producing a local concentration of ~3
x 10-4 molecules/nm3 (~0.0005 M).531The acetylcholine molecules
diffuse across the cleft to the postsynaptic membrane (Section
4.8.6.4), where they bind to specific receptor proteins (Section
3.3.3), opening ion channels within 0.1 millisec313 and partially
depolarizing the cell, increasing local Na+ permeability. When
depolarization reaches ~15% of full voltage range (e.g., from -60
mV down to about -40 mV), voltage-activated sodium channels
open, making the membrane highly permeable to Na+ ions. These
ions rapidly flow into the cell and initiate the ~100 nanoamp799
action potential spike. These channels close spontaneously after a
short interval to reduce permeability, thus allowing the membrane
voltage to be restored to its normal resting potential (Section 3.3.3).
A sorting-rotor-tipped manipulator (Section 3.4.2) or pressurized
nanoinjector (Section 9.2.7.1) placed in the vicinity of the synaptic
cleft can emit a puff of ~105 acetylcholine molecules (~20,000 nm3
),
producing partial depolarization and initiating nerve impulses at
will. (This is preferable to the use of unnatural depolarizing agents
such as veratridine.) A 1-micron3 storage volume contains ~5 billion
molecules, sufficient to induce ~50,000 discharges or ~1 hour of
continuous firing at 15 Hz. The initiating mechanism must provoke a
discharge in ~1 millisec, a throughput rate of 108 molecules/sec
requiring, say, ~100 sorting rotors with total manipulator tool tip
area ~104 nm2
. At 15 Hz continuous firing, ~106 molecules/sec are
* From a practical standpoint, R. Bradbury notes that designers should have knowledge of the biochemical pathways that are most critical in the response to a signal, hence
nanorobots may be able to skip the intermediate steps required in the biological system. In the present example, the cascade is typically intended to increase the glucose
available for muscles, so it might make more sense to skip the cAMP step and simply commence disassembly of glycogen (in the liver and muscles) and accelerate the pumping
of glucose into the bloodstream (from the liver).
** Under controlled mechanochemical conditions (Chapter 19) where the effective heat of protonation of the buffering system can be ignored, the net enthalpy of hydrolysis
at 298 K and pH 7 may fall as low as ~1.95 zJ/molecule, or ~0.28 Kcal/mole.3142
Basic Capabilities • Communication 197
consumed. Sorting rotors placed near the cleft can also absorb the
two breakdown products (acetate and choline) of acetylcholinesterase
activity (~150 microsec turnover time 3143) and recycle them into
new molecules of acetylcholine. Taking the enthalpy of hydrolysis
under physiological conditions** as ~70 zJ/molecule (~10 Kcal/mole)
for the acetylcholinesterase-mediated hydrolysis reaction,3142 the
power requirement for continuously recycling 106
 molecules/sec is
~0.07 pW. A similar rotor transport mechanism may also be used
to rapidly extract acetylcholine molecules from the synaptic cleft,
thus extinguishing a passing nerve impulse. Note that to exert control
over nerve impulses, neurotransmitter injectors must be placed very
close to the post-synaptic surface because the effective diffusion
radius of acetylcholine is only a few microns, due to the high efficiency
of local acetylcholinesterase. 803
Many compounds other than acetylcholine may serve as neurotransmitters (Table 7.2), including nitric oxide and possibly carbon
monoxide.1125,1129 Catecholamines such as dopamine, norepinephrine
and epinephrine, synthesized in the adrenal gland and elsewhere,
act as neurotransmitters at adrenergic synapses which are found at
the junctions between nerves and smooth muscles in internal organs such as the intestine and in nerve-nerve junctions in the brain.
There are also histaminergic neurons found exclusively in the hippocampus.1123 Most tissues in the human body are innervated by several different types of nerve cells, each using a different neurotransmitter, allowing a great diversity of signals and responses. But
synaptic-resident nanorobots should be able to monitor, stimulate, or
extinguish all of these signals, even given the confusing geometries
entailed by synaptic clusters.
While some synapses use excitory neurotransmitters that elicit
an electrical signal, others use different neurotransmitters such as
GABA, glycine, or the enkephalins that deliver an inhibitory signal,
suppressing electrical response. Some molecules work both ways.
For example, acetylcholine is excitory at neuromuscular junctions
but may be excitory or inhibitory in the central and peripheral nervous
system. A nerve cell may receive thousands of these excitory and
inhibitory chemical inputs, and their relative number determines
the probability of axonal firing. Again, selections from the complete
known library of neurotransmitters of all types may be made available
for storage, synthesis, absorption or release by properly configured
nanorobots.
Neuropeptides, which can act as highly specific triggers for complex
patterns of activity in the nervous system (including memory,
learning, perception, mood, and behavior) and allow long-term
chemical modulation of synaptic sensitivity, add yet another complication to neural outmessaging by nanorobots. Neuropeptides are
manufactured by ribosomes on rough endoplasmic reticulum within
the neuron cell body and must be transported to axon terminals for
release by “fast axonal transport”—a journey that may take a day or
more for a long axon. They are stored in intracellular vesicles from
which they are released to the extracellular space of peptidergic
neurons. Neuropeptides released into the synaptic cleft serve as
neuromodulators (to inhibit the action of excitory neurotransmitters)
or neuromediators (to prolong the action of neurotransmitters), both
functions easily duplicated by nanorobots. However, neuropeptides
released into the bloodstream act as long-range neurohormones, and
neuropeptides released into the extracellular space act as paracrines
and enter both pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic cascades.770
Nanorobot management of these more diffusely distributed tissue
neuropeptide concentrations (e.g., by mimicking the action of natural
peptidases of broad substrate specificity) is a more difficult, though
not intractable, task.
There are many other methods by which in vivo nanorobots can
outmessage to neurons:
1. Periodic manipulation of electric (Section 4.8.6.1) and magnetic
(Section 4.8.6.2) fields may trigger neural impulses.3328
2. An excess population of Na+ ions outside the myelinated nerve
fiber establishes an intra-axonal resting potential of -60 mV.
The net movement of Na+ associated with a single neural impulse
is ~0.3 ion/micron2 in ~0.5 millisec,526 so the direct injection
of a few electric charges should produce local depolarization,
initiating a neural impulse. Note that the voltage balance is
maintained by differing concentrations of several ions, not
just Na+, although the inrush of Na+ is the primary cause of
membrane voltage change during the discharge spike.
3. Membrane ionic currents may be pharmacologically manipulated
by nanodevices permanently stationed within the cytosol. For
example, sodium pumps are completely inhibited by the injection
of 10-100 nM of cardioactive steroids such as ouabain and
strophanthidin.805 Injection of ~300 nM tetrodotoxin inhibits
sodium currents while leaving potassium currents unchanged;
inserting tetraethylammonium blocks only the potassium currents,
while leaving sodium currents unchanged.804
4. Establishing a localized ~100 mV circumaxonal (external)
superexcess of positive charge may present an electrical barrier
steep enough to quench a depolarization wave, thus extinguishing
a passing nerve impulse. Techniques of electronic anesthesia,
such as transcutaneous electronic nerve stimulation (TENS) and
cell demodulated electronic anesthesia (CEDETA), involve crude
applications of similar principles.3299,3300
5. Long-term electrical stimulation of neurons using electrodes to
apply 0.1-Hz pulses for ~105 sec reduced the expression of neural
cell adhesion molecule L1 (NCAM) by a factor of ~13.1063
6. Direct ultrasonic stimulation of neurons.3535
7.4.6 Outmessaging to Patient or User
In many applications, in vivo medical nanodevices may need to
communicate information directly to the user or patient. This
capability is crucial in providing feedback to establish stable and
reliable autogenous command and control systems (Chapter 12).
Outmessaging from nanorobot to the patient or user requires the
nanodevice to manipulate a sensory channel that is consciously
available to human perception, which manipulation can then be
properly interpreted by the patient as a message.
Sensory channels available for such communication include sight,
audition, gustation and olfaction, kinesthesia, and somesthetic sensory
channels such as pressure, pain, and temperature. Nanodevice-originated
data may be superimposed upon the natural sensory traffic by:
1. generating an artificial sensory stimulus,
2. direct stimulation of the receptor in the absence of actual sensory
stimulus, or
3. triggering artificial action potentials in the afferent nerves that
carry information from the sensor to the CNS.
7.4.6.1 Somesthetic Outmessaging
Human skin contains about 700,000 pressure or touch receptors,
mostly concentrated on the fingers (~17,000 receptors on all fingertips) and on the face—especially the lips and the tip of the tongue.
198 Nanomedicine • Volume I
In addition to information about the presence of tactile stimuli,
touch receptors can also discriminate both intensity and spatial
direction of the stimulus (Table 7.3). Meissner’s corpuscle, located
in the papillae of the corium just beneath the epidermis, is a receptor
for light touch. The Pacinian corpuscle is a deep touch or pressure
receptor located in the deep parts of the dermis, in the connective
tissue around muscles, tendons, and joints, and in the mesenteries
supporting the visceral organs.
A networked population of outmessaging nanorobots, with each
nanorobot positioned near a Meissner’s or Pacinian corpuscle and
capable of triggering artificial nerve impulses (Section 7.4.5.6), could
create coordinated spatial and temporal patterns of pressure sensations
that could be interpreted by the patient as specific messages. For
example, nanorobots neurally emulating the sensation of pressure in
the fingers in the sequence Thumb-Thumb-Ring-Index-Thumb
are communicating the message “11421” to the user at a transfer
rate of 1-10 bits/sec. Similarly, stimulating the arrector muscles
artificially triggers the nerve plexus surrounding epidermal hair follicles
(which register hair motion), creating well-defined and potentially
communicative patterns of “gooseflesh” on the skin.
Mild stimulation of pain receptors (nociceptors), consisting of
unmyelinated free sensory nerve endings with pain sensation mediated
by the peptide nociceptin, could also produce interpretable messages.
For instance, some C fibers when sufficiently stimulated produce
burning pain, while small D fibers signal a prickling pain. (There
are ~228 pain receptors/cm2 in the neck region, ~188/cm2 on the
back of the hand, ~95/cm2 on the radial surface of the middle finger,
and ~44/cm2 on the tip of the nose).869 Heat receptors (brushes of
Ruffini) and cold receptors (end bulbs of Krause) also may be
employed for outmessaging. Cold spots outnumber warm spots by
a factor of 4-10, with temperature receptors concentrated on the
face and hands and specific regions showing marked differences in
the mix of sensor types (e.g., the forehead contains 0.6 warm receptors/
cm2 but 8.0 cold receptors/cm2
). Nanorobots could employ these
neural channels to communicate temporally- and spatially-ordered
sensations of burning pain, prickly pain, or heat and cold. The
maximum serial transfer rate of each of these outmessaging channels to
the conscious human mind may be only ~1 bit/sec, although complex
spatial and temporal patterns using multiple parallel channels
involving significantly higher data flows may be employed in creating
full-immersion virtual reality simulations and in related applications
(Chapter 25).
The Optacon (Optical-to-Tactile Converter), originally
developed by NASA, scanned normal inkprint and converted
the characters into a tactile format on a 24 x 6 vibrating-pin
array, enabling the blind to feel-read without Braille. Average
users achieved ~30 words/min, or up to ~100 words/min in
exceptional cases. The Optacon was first sold in 1970 by
Telesensory Inc. but is no longer manufactured. Blazie Engineering,
Inc., which acquired all rights to the Optacon in 1998, also sells
Power Braille, an 81-character 8-dot refreshable Braille display for
desktop computer applications.
7.4.6.2 Kinesthetic Outmessaging
Direct stimulation of kinesthetic sensory neural channels for
outmessaging may prove disorienting, disturbing, confusing, or even
nauseogenic to the user, as for example a periodic manipulation of
the vestibular ganglion (creating synthetic vertigo), muscular stretch
receptors (creating “phantom limb” effects), or reflex arcs (e.g.,
sneezing, knee jerks, lactation, pupillary dilation, or orgasm).
Patients might be slightly more comfortable if nanorobots generate
a genuine sensory stimulus which can then be detected as a true
sensory reading. Examples might include the creation of patterned
nervous tics by triggering small-muscle spasms in the face or limbs
(twitches), temporally-structured subvocal hiccups by stimulating
and inhibiting the phrenic nerve causing tiny spasms in the diaphragm
muscle, or periodic blepharospasms (winking) by stimulating the
orbicularis palpebrarum muscle (ring muscle) of the eye.
Selective activation of motor neurons controlling the ~400
skeletal muscles in the human body can produce involuntary macroscopic limb motion. To take a familiar example, properly positioned
neurostimulatory nanorobots may trigger in sequence the extensor
indicis and the flexor indicis muscles, causing the second and third
phalanges of the index finger first to extend, then to retract; or trigger
Table 7.3. Tactile Receptors in the Human Skin854,869,1633-1637
Probable Receptive Frequency # of Fingertip
Receptor Sensory Field, Range Range (and Receptors
Skin Receptor Type Class Skin Type Correlation (and Median) Most Sensitive) (and on Palm)
Pacinian corpuscles PC G, H Vibration, tickle 10-1000 mm2 40-800 Hz 21/cm2
(100 mm2
) (200-300 Hz) (9/cm2
)
Meissner’s corpuscles RA G Touch, tickle, 1-100 mm2 10-200 Hz 140/cm2
motion, vibration (13 mm2
) (20-40 Hz) (25/cm2
)
Hair follicle nerve RA H Touch, vibration ~ 0.01 mm2 10-100 Hz (?) 10/cm2
200/cm2 (scalp)
Ruffini ending SA II G, H Stretch, shear, 10-500 mm2 7 Hz 49/cm2
tension (?) (60 mm2
) (16/cm2
)
Merkel’s cells SA I G Pressure, edge (?) 2-100 mm2 0.4-100 Hz 70/cm2
(11 mm2
) (7 Hz) (8/cm2
)
Tactile disks SA I H Pressure, edge (?) 3-50 mm2 1-100 Hz (?) 70/cm2
 (?)
(10 Hz) (?) (8/cm2
) (?)
PC = Pacinian afferents; RA = rapidly-adapting afferents; SA II = slowly-adapting, large receptive field afferents; SA I = slowly-adapting, small receptive field
mechanoreceptive afferents; G = glabrous (hairless) skin; H = hairy skin.
Basic Capabilities • Communication 199
the extensor minimi digiti and the flexor brevis minimi digiti
muscles, causing the second and third phalanges of the little finger
to extend, then the first phalanx of the little finger to flex; or trigger
the extensor pollicis brevis and the flexor pollicis brevis muscles,
causing the base of the first phalanx of the thumb to extend, then
retract. These artificially induced finger movements may be directly
interpreted as messages by a trained user at a 1-10 bit/sec transfer
rate, or else the patient may grasp a handheld device that translates
the controlled sequence of forced gripping motions into a correct
alphanumeric or voiced message.
7.4.6.3 Auditory Outmessaging
The human ear consists of an air-filled external auditory canal
terminating on the ~1 cm2 tympanic membrane (~100 microns
thick), whose vibrations are transmitted through the bony ossicles
of the ~2 cm3 middle ear to the membranous oval window of the
inner ear (Fig. 7.3). From there, sound energy enters the cochlea as
compressional waves in the perilymph, an incompressible watery
fluid that fills most of the ~100 mm3 spiral cochlear tube. This
~35-mm long tube resembles a snail shell, coiled two and a half
times around the modiolus, itself the center axis along which pass
the cochlear nerves and blood vessels. About 24,000 hair cells
(multifiber stereocilia) on the basilar membrane under the tectorial
membrane (Fig. 7.4) inside the cochlea resonate in response to different acoustic frequencies. These cells make complex synaptic contacts with neurons of the spiral ganglion, which passes this aural
information into the auditory (8th cranial) nerve and thence to the
brain for decoding.
A large nanodevice (~20-50 microns) stationed in the perilymph
of the cochlea can “speak” directly into the human ear, loud enough
to be heard. Total acoustic power delivered to the tympanic membrane
during normal audition is ~10-4 pW (0 dB) at the threshold of
hearing, ~0.1 pW for whispering (30 dB), and ~100 pW for
normal conversation (60 dB). At the low frequencies (30-10,000
Hz) common to human speech, micron-scale acoustic radiators are
very inefficient (Section 7.2.2.1) although there are virtually no
attenuation losses (Eqn. 4.52). Even so, from Eqn. 7.7 a cochlear
nanodevice able to apply an input power of 2000 pW to an acoustic
omnidirectional piston radiator 20 microns in diameter can generate
10 KHz sound waves at an output power ~ 0.1 pW, approximately
the intensity level of whispering. At a more comfortable 3 KHz (the
peak sensitivity of human hearing), Pin must rise to ~22,000 pW or
piston diameter must increase to 45 microns to maintain Pout ~ 0.1
pW, or a duty cycle substantially less than 100% must be employed.
If linked to a communication network, the cochlear nanodevice can
receive information to be audibilized from the network. This device
can also be used for acoustic inmessaging by allowing it to intercept
sound waves before they reach the basilar membrane, then passing
this information immediately to the network (which thus receives
the signal sooner than the brain). Perilymph contains glucose for power
at roughly serum concentrations; alternatively, the cochlear device
can absorb and store the natural ambient acoustic energy present in
the auditory canal (Section 7.4.8).
Similarly, a nanorobot located in the endolymph-filled scala
media, the innermost of the three parallel chambers of the cochlea,
can attach itself to the reticular lamina of the organ of Corti and
physically manipulate the stereocilia to produce the desired audible
stimulus. Stereocilia are spaced over the organ of Corti at a linear
density of ~1 cell/micron along the 30 mm length of the cochlear
spiral tube.585 Continuously stimulating all ~100 cells within reach
of a 20-micron diameter nanorobot with bidirectional 40-micron
long extensible manipulators should produce a narrow-frequency
tone up to ~0.4% of maximum pressure amplitude, close to normal
conversational levels. Hair cells have a membrane time constant of
~0.5 millisec ,772 in theory permitting a transfer rate of up to ~2000
bits/sec if all stereocilia are manipulated coherently as a single channel.
Careful design should prevent unwanted stimulation of tinnitus.
Fig. 7.3. Cross-section of the human ear (redrawn from Davis and Silverman868).
200 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Direct neural stimulation of some of the ~31,000 spiral ganglion
cells allows transduction of information into the human auditory
system. Each ganglial cell carries temporal and amplitude information
on a narrow band of acoustic frequencies received by the ear, essentially
a crude Fourier transform of the original audio signal. Properly
positioned nanorobots can superimpose artificial signals on this
natural traffic which may be perceived by the patient as a
frequency-reconstructed voice of limited tonal range speaking words
or numbers. Nanorobots stationed at the saccule, an otolithic organ
in the vestibule of the inner ear, can stimulate direct ultrasonic hearing
in humans up to ~108 KHz.1372 In 1998, cochlear implant devices
were in wide use, with audible sounds transmitted by FM radio
waves to an electrode array in the inner ear, providing direct electrical
stimulation of the auditory nerves.1891-1893
A review of current technology in artificial speech synthesis1653,1654 is beyond the scope of this text.
7.4.6.4 Gustatory and Olfactory Outmessaging
In theory it would be possible to insert artificial flavors onto the
lingual surface, or to release artificial scents into the nasal epithelium.
However, human taste buds have a lifetime of ~10 days, requiring
constant repositioning of resident chemical emission devices.
Human olfactory receptors are located at the back of the nose (Fig.
8.11), covered by a sheet of mucus, adding signal time delays and
dispersion (due to finite and differential molecular diffusion rates)
to high-frequency olfactory messages. Additionally, frequent
large-volume chemical emissions from individual nanorobots is not
feasible due to scaling factors (Section 7.2.1.8).
In this case it appears more efficient to stimulate the gustatory
and olfactory nerves directly. This minimizes power consumption,
reduces the required volume of chemical releases by many orders of
magnitude, and permits rapid multiplexing of numerous distinct
synthetic sensory signals.
A. Gustatory Outmessaging — There are ~12,000 taste buds innervated by nerve fibers that lose their myelin sheaths as they pass
through the basement membrane. Large fibers end on two or more
bud cells, with the endings of small fibers invaginating the receptor
cell membrane. The large taste fibers from the anterior two-thirds
of the tongue branch from the lingual nerve to form a slender nerve,
the chorda tympani, which traverses the eardrum as part of the
facial (7th cranial) nerve en route to the medulla. The afferent
fibers from the posterior third of the tongue collect in the lingual
branch of the glossopharyngeal (9th cranial) nerve, through the
petrosal ganglia and into the medulla. Since taste buds have a
response repertoire of only five known distinct sensations (sweet,
sour, bitter, salt, and umami*), nanorobots seeking to artificially
provoke these sensations may proceed to the chorda tympani or
petrosal ganglia with the objective of triggering a higher-level confluent
signal on each of a handful of distinct ganglial positions corresponding
to the five primary stimuli plus a small set of mixed-sensitivity
combinations. Proper identification of the nerve bundles carrying
information on each of the five primary stimuli may require a brief
training session or prior connectivity mapping (Chapter 25). Note
also that natural taste response time is diffusion-limited to ~1 sec
(~1 Hz, ~1 bit/sec), and it is not yet known whether the natural
*Umami, a complex “meaty” or “savory” tastiness factor, was first identified by a Japanese scientist, Professor Ikeda, at the University of Tokyo.3030-3034 Umami is specifically
associated with monosodium glutamate (MSG)3035, sodium inosinate, and sodium guanylate. Specific taste bud receptors (e.g., mGluR4) for umami have been discovered.3033,3034
 Fig. 7.4. Cross-section of the cochlear duct (redrawn from Wilson526).
Basic Capabilities • Communication 201
conscious brain can be educated to process multiplexed
high-frequency (up to 10-100 Hz, or ~10-100 bits/sec)
artificially-stimulated taste signals.
B. Olfactory Outmessaging — Humans have up to 50 million
olfactory sensors spaced an average ~3 microns apart in the olfactory
epithelium (~2.5 cm2
/nostril) located in the upper part of the nasal
cavities on the surface of the superior conchae and upper part of the
septum (see Figure 8.11). Each sensor protrudes a long and extremely
thin olfactory nerve fiber. These fibers are grouped into ~20 filaments
in each nasal cavity, and the filaments pass through the cribriform
plate of the ethmoid bone into the olfactory bulb (the terminus of
the olfactory (1st cranial) nerve) in the forebrain in the cranial cavity.
The nasal epithelium also contains a few bare nerve endings from
fibers of the trigeminal (5th cranial) nerve. The responses of olfactory
receptor neurons are rarely specific to only one odor; the majority
of cells respond to a broad range of substances.3433
The olfactory nerve fibers enter the olfactory bulb to end in a
series of intricate basketlike synaptic terminations or antenna-shaped
dendritic clusters called glomeruli. Each olfactory glomerulus
receives impulses from about 26,000 receptors and sends them on
through 24 mitral cells and 68 tufted cells, thus showing a high
degree of neural convergence.
The number of such glomeruli (~1000) may approximate the
number of nonmultiplexed distinct olfactory sensations available to
man. Humans can identify over 10,000 structurally distinct odorant
ligands807—some have claimed as many as 400,000 discernible
odors3134,3135—but this does not imply an equally large repertoire
of odorant receptors, because structurally related odorants may bind
to the same receptor molecules.1120 Indeed, individual neurons
respond strongly to closely related groups of odorants and weakly
or not at all to many others.807 Sensory neurons with similar ligand
specificities project to common glomeruli. The family of 7TD
membrane proteins, which is localized to the olfactory cilia and
shares homology with the superfamily of neurotransmitters and
neuropeptide 7TD receptors,808 constitutes an extremely large
multigene family likely to encode odorant receptors that transduce
intracellular signals by interacting with cellular transmembrane G
proteins which then activate second messenger systems inside the
cell. This family of putative odorant receptors could constitute one
of the largest gene families in the genome, with perhaps as many as
500-1000 genes,809 approximately one receptor type for each
glomerulus.
If each glomerulus may be treated as the locus for a single unique
olfactory sensation, this may provide an essentially clear output
channel for a neurostimulatory nanodevice. Such a device could
trigger action potentials in a single glomerulus producing a perception
of a rapidly pulsing (possibly up to ~10-100 Hz, or ~10-100 bits/
sec) rare scent. Such signals would no longer be diffusion limited
(to ~1 Hz, ~1 bit/sec) as is the case with natural olfaction, and rapid
adaptation caused by receptor saturation would also be eliminated
for these signals since the signals are inserted at the glomeruli and
don’t pass through the sensory receptors at all. A thousand coordinated
nanorobots positioned one at each glomerulus could provide complete
olfactory sensation control and the potential for massive multiplexing.
As with taste messaging, it is unknown whether the natural conscious
brain can be trained to process such multiplexed high-frequency
smell signals. In 1998, studies of the human olfactory (combinatorial)
code were in progress.3207
7.4.6.5 Ocular Outmessaging
Nanorobots may send messages to the patient by emitting photons
directly into the eye (Fig. 7.5), generating an artificial visual
stimulus. Retinal displays could be broadcast by photoemissive
nanodevices located:
Fig. 7.5. The human eyeball (redrawn from Leukel869).
202 Nanomedicine • Volume I
1. in the palpebral conjunctiva (inner mucosal surface) of the eyelid,
where access to nutrients from the capillary bloodflow is still
available in muscular tissue below the fibrous plates;
2. on the exterior surface of the cornea, when nanorobots may
obtain power from transcorneal-diffused glucose and other sugars
in the lacrimal fluids at cligand ~ 2.9 x 10-4 molecules/nm3 (~10%
blood plasma concentration);585
3. on the interior corneal or exterior lens surface (cligand =
1.6-3.7 x 10-3 molecules/nm3 for glucose in the aqueous
humor, ~plasma concentration),585,3284 or in the anterior
chamber in front of the lens (implanting an artificial lens in the
anterior chamber was considered an experimental vision correction procedure in 1998);
4. inside the lens which is 68% water (cligand = 0.8-2.0 x 10-3
molecules/nm3 for glucose,585 ~50% plasma concentration);
5. the interior lens or retinal surface with access to glucose in the
vitreous humor (~same concentration as aqueous humor); or
6. within the individual rod (dim light, monochromatic) and cone
(bright light, color-sensitive) cells — retinal glucose is stored in
glial Muller cells and is supplied upon demand.3260
Oxygen is available at ~5% of normal plasma concentration via
solvation in the lacrimal fluids and diffusion into the aqueous
humor; CO2 and lactate exit by the same route. Formation of
potentially signal-blocking scar tissue is avoided by using mobile
nanorobots with active, biocompatible exterior surfaces3234 (Chapter
15).
We shall now consider four different methods for ocular
outmessaging:
A. Extraretinal Projection — Photoemissive nanodevices must
generate a photon flux intensity sufficient to equal or exceed ambient
background illumination levels. With the eyelid lightly closed, normal
indoor illumination transmitted through this thin muscular fibrous
tissue produces a background retinal flux of at least Imin ~ 10-2 watts/
m2
. With eyes open in a normally lighted room, the background
flux may be ~1 watt/m2
 or even higher (Section 4.9.4).
Normally the lens of the eye can accommodate viewing distances
no closer than Xmin ~ 10 cm (measured from posterior lens surface)
in adults. Photons emitted from nanodevices located in the eyelid
(Xobject ~ 8.6 mm), exterior corneal surface (Xobject ~ 7.3 mm), interior
corneal surface (Xobject ~ 6.2 mm), or exterior lens surface (Xobject
~ 3.8 mm) cannot be brought to focus inside the eye unless they
are tightly collimated. A cylindrical emitter of length he = 25
microns and radius re = 0.5 micron can produce a collimated beam
with an axial divergence angle ϕe = 0.5 tan-1 (2 re / he) ~ 1˚ (2˚ full-width
divergence), which is geometrically equivalent to rays passing
through a pupil aperture dpupil = 5-6 mm after emanating from an
object located at a distance Xobject = dpupil / 2 tan (ϕe) = 12-15 cm
which is Xmin, hence is focusable. One major difficulty with eyelid
projection is that tight flexing of the corrugator supercilii muscle
(which draws the eyebrow downward and inward) causes the eyelid
tissue to ripple and fold, potentially producing significant optical
distortions. A large projector suspended in the anterior chamber
might offer greater spatial stability. These devices are probably small
enough to avoid stimulating lid edema or blepharitis.
Present-day micron-scale LEDs emit up to ~1 watt/m2 (Section
5.3.7), so extraretinal displays from such emitters are comfortably
read by patients. If the emitters overwrite 10% of the
visual field, then total optical power input through the lens is
Pout ~ 0.03-3.0 microwatts. Assuming a very conservative energy
conversion efficiency of e% ~ 0.01(1%) for LEDs (Section 5.3.7),
the emitters consume a total input power (and radiate waste heat)
of Pin = Pout / e% = 3-300 microwatts, well below the conservative
2000 microwatt maximum for 0.1 cm3 of eyelid tissue (Eqn. 6.54).
Emitter power density ranges from ~0.4 megawatts/m3 at 10-2 watts/
m2
 intensity up to ~40 megawatts/m3
 at 1 watt/m2
 intensity.
B. Foveal Projection — The fovea is a small pit in the macula
lutea, opposite the visual axis, which is the spot of most distinct
vision (Fig. 7.5). There are no rod cells in the fovea and relatively
few in the near-foveal region. Foveal cone cells have diameters of
1-5 microns585 (average dfov ~ 3 microns) with a minimum
center-to-center separation of ~2.6 microns (average xsep ~ 5.2
microns) across the foveal surface of the retina. The retina is
arranged “inside out” so that light must pass through nine layers of
connecting nerve cells and other tissue to reach the receptors which
lie at the deepest level (Fig. 7.6, enlargement of box in Figure 7.5).
This covering tissue is xtiss ~ 130 microns deep across the fovea (the
ganglion and bipolar layers are pushed aside, directly above the fovea)
and xtiss ~ 300 microns thick elsewhere on the retina. The foveal
and near-foveal region extends ~2˚ (~0.55 mm2
) around the visual
axis, comprising ~20,000 cone cells and providing a resolvable visual
angle of 0.5-2.3 minutes of arc (sufficient for reading printed text)
and creating a 140 x 140 pixel writeable billboard.
Consider a cylindrical emitter of diameter ~1 micron affixed to
the retinal surface over the fovea. This emitter produces a collimated
beam with an axial divergence angle ϕe ~ 1˚, which diverges to a
width wbeam = xtiss tan (2 ϕe) ~ 5.2 microns after traveling a distance
xtiss = 130 microns into the fovea. Each cylindrical emitter can target
one foveal cone cell with no overlap, so ~20,000 photoemissive
nanorobots are required for complete control of all foveal cone
receptors. A population of 20,000 photoemissive nanodevices
~1 micron in diameter attached to the inner retinal membrane above
the foveal surface blocks only ~3% of photons entering the fovea
via the lens, an unnoticable diminution of the natural incident
intensity that is visible to the patient.*
Given that dfov < wbeam and π re
2 < 1 micron2
, achieving
0.01-1 watts/m2 intensity at the receptor cells to overcome the
natural illumination background requires an emitter photonic
intensity of 0.04-4 watts/m2
, already within state-of-the-art in 1998.
At a very conservative e% = 0.01(1%) ergophotonic efficiency, Pin
~ 3-300 pW per nanodevice or 0.06-6 microwatts for the entire
population, well below the ~0.1 watt recommended thermogenic
limit for the eyeball from Eqn. 6.54. If the nanorobot employs an
oxyglucose power supply, continuous foveal control consumes
~1010-1012 glucose molecules/sec which would exhaust the ~1019
glucose molecules present in the vitreous humor in ~0.3-30 years
but would more quickly exhaust the oxygen supply (Section 6.5.3)
in ~0.5-50 days even if there were no diffusive resupply from the
surrounding tissues; fortunately, such resupply appears highly likely.
If the photoemissive foveal nanorobot population is extended to
cover the rest of the retinal surface (with most devices not emitting
photons most of the time), then real-time ocular and cranial positional
* J. Logajan points out that if the cylindrical emitter has a photodetector on the end facing the lens, then even the 3% loss could be largely retrieved by amplification; the
emitters could also serve as dark-area amplifiers, providing improved night vision or infrared-to-visible light conversion (Chapter 30).
Basic Capabilities • Communication 203
information provided by kinesthetic macrosensors (Section 4.9.2.1)
via the communication network can be used to shift displayed
images in synchrony with eye and head movements, allowing displays
to appear fixed in the field of view as in normal viewing of external
objects. (Information gleaned from the oculomotor, trochlear,
trigeminal, abducens, and spinal accessory nerves may assist in this
control process.) Accommodation sensors (Section 7.4.2.2) assist
in maintaining proper focus. Foveal nanorobots should be designed
to avoid stimulation of uveitis or retinitis.
C. Ganglionic Stimulation — Because of the inverted structure
of the retina, neurostimulatory nanorobots attached to the inner
retinal membrane can trigger artificial action potentials directly in
the axons of afferent ganglia carrying information from rods and
cones to the optic (2nd cranial) nerve. It is useful to briefly review
the basic structure of the human retina (Fig. 7.6).
Starting with the outermost layer and moving inward toward the
vitreous humor that fills the eyeball, the choroid layer (Fig. 7.5) is
covered with a very sensitive optically absorbing pigmented epithelium
which bleeds and detaches easily from the retina if physically disturbed
by overpressures of ~10 mmHg. Above and covering the pigment
layer lie about 250 million rod cells and 6 million cone cells. Rod
and cone cells communicate by electronic conduction, not by action potentials. Rod and cone receptor cells converge in a complex
synaptic network on bipolar and horizontal cells. Bipolar cells are
depolarizing (inhibited by rod/cone neurotransmitters) or hyperpolarizing (excited by rod/cone neurotransmitters), allowing the
transmission of positive and negative signals to amacrine and ganglion cells. Horizontal cells laterally connect rods and cones to bipolar cells, allowing lateral inhibition in the retina. Amacrine cells
connect bipolar cells to ganglion cells. Numerous types of ganglion
cells react to contrast borders, intensity changes and color contrasts.
Preprocessed visual information flows into ~1 million ganglion cells
whose fibers collect into a giant bundle and exit the eyeball under
the ~1.5 mm-diameter optic disk or “blind spot”, forming the
optic nerve. Convergence is maximal at the periphery of the retina—
rods outnumber cones by more than 10:1 in the periphery, and up
to 103
-104 rods may report to a single ganglion cell. Convergence is
minimal in the fovea, where one cone cell may synapse with a single
ganglion cell through a single bipolar cell.
Low-level signal processing aided by amacrine and horizontal
cells in the bipolar layer thus reduces the optic data traffic from 256
million to only 1 million channels at the ganglionic axons which lie
closest to the nanorobots attached to the inner retinal membrane.
The ganglia are spaced from ~3 microns apart bordering the fovea
to ~100 microns apart at the farthest periphery of the retina, averaging ~30 microns. For simplicity, if we regard each ganglion as
carrying the equivalent of a single pixel of data in a 1000 x 1000
pixel visual field, then a comprehensive retinal ganglionic management system comprising ~106 neurostimulatory devices installed
within each eyeball allows complete control of the entire human
visual field with a refresh rate close to the flicker frequency for rods
of ~15 Hz,585 with ocular data transfer near ~107 bits/sec which is
near the practical upper limit for in vivo mobile communication
networks (Section 7.3.2). Assuming up to Pin ~ 30 pW for each
neurostimulatory nanorobot (Section 7.4.5.6) a continuously
operated retinal ganglionic control system consumes at most ~30
microwatts, comparable to ocular projection systems described in
(A) and (B), so energy supply and heat generation are not significant
design limitations.
As of 1998, prototype retinal implant components had been
installed and tested in rabbits. These test devices delivered ~10
microamps per electrode directly to ganglion cells and produced
measurable activity in the visual cortex of the animals’ brains.1044
Fig. 7.6. Above, the human retina (redrawn from Vander et al866 and
Feynman et al538).
204 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Other retinal implant devices were under investigation by Rolf
Eckmiller at Universitat Bonn, by a Harvard Medical School/MIT
collaboration, and by a Japanese group at Nagoya University;1887-1890
Eckmiller expects the first implant in a human volunteer by 2001.
Direct electrical stimulation of the human visual cortex was first
attempted in 1968 using 100 Hz pulses applied in 200 microsec
bursts via an array of 81 electrodes implanted in a blind person’s
brain, with poor results.1713
D. Direct Photoreceptor Stimulation — A single photoemissive
nanorobot may be carefully stationed in each of the 256 million
rod and cone cells of the human eye. If the nanorobot is positioned
in the pigment-rich apical region of the cell,* (e.g., the ~9-nm
thick double-membranous lamellae, or planar structures, of the outer
segment of the rod cell; Figure 7.6) its emitted photon is likely to
be detected even without collimation. Assuming a very conservative
1% energy conversion efficiency to generate optical photons, 10%
absorption efficiency of optical photons within the cell, and a 25
Hz image refresh rate, power consumption is only ~0.01 pW per
nanorobot for continuous transmission and ~2.5 microwatts for
complete control of the human visual apparatus. Outmessaging rates
are limited by the peak capacity of the external communications
link, ~107 bits/sec for a mobile network using ν ~ 100 MHz and
fduty = 10% (Section 7.3.2).
Chemical or mechanochemical stimulation may also be used in
place of photons. For example, such means could induce the 11-cis
to 11-trans torsional isomerization of the retinal chromophore in
rhodopsin, the first step in photoreceptor stimulation, which
occurs naturally in ~0.2 picosec.1692 This conformational change
opens a calcium channel in the rod cell membrane; the rapid calcium
ion influx triggers a nerve impulse, and light is perceived by the
brain.996 (Each rod rises1-2 microkelvins in temperature during the
heat burst following a light flash causing 180-1800 rhodopsin
photoisomerizations per rod.3470)Direct nanorobot modulation of
intracellular concentrations of α-transducin, the G-protein that transduces the light signal in retinal cells, or directly opening an artificial
transmembrane Ca++ channel allowing a Ca++ influx (mediated by a
membrane-spanning nanorobot) may be even more efficient.
7.4.6.6 Artificial Symptoms
The triggering of artificial symptoms in the human body offers
at best a primitive, noisy, misinterpretable, and low bit rate
outmessaging channel. Outmessaging protocols may allow a
population of in vivo nanorobots to communicate systemwide status
(e.g., “low serum oxygen,” “low serum glucose,” “immune system
under attack,”) or specific conditions (e.g., “cancer tumor detected
in breast,” “breach of intestinal wall detected”) directly with the
patient by inducing recognizable physiological cues (e.g., fever, nausea,
shivering, tingling, gasping, tinnitus, hypothalamic “reward” center
stimulation). But message noise level is high because these signals
are readily confused with natural symptoms that may normally
communicate the presence of entirely unrelated conditions. One
suggestion to improve the signal/noise ratio is to insert artificial
genes that code for enzymes producing a harmless but chromatic
signaling compound that colors the urine when excreted, or which
adds an unusual color to hair or fingernails as a diagnostic telltale.2991
Nanodevices also could “manually” trigger such a gene, or
manufacture the colorant themselves. Alternatively, coordinated
nanorobot-induced neural firings might produce externally-measurable
changes in the cranial radiative electric field.3472 All these sorts of
information transfer are very energy inefficient and are about as
informative as “Indian smoke signals.”731 Artificial symptoms
have only limited utility as a primitive channel for nanodevice
outmessaging.
7.4.6.7 Macroscale Outmessaging Transducers
Inmessaging transducers (Section 7.4.2.7) may also be employed
as outmessaging interfaces between in vivo nanorobots and patients.
For example, a simple transduction organ (e.g., macroscale
transdermal needle) inserted into the bloodflow could chemically
or acoustically interrogate passing nanodevices and obtain information
from them as they travel by, without the need for nanodevice
removal or locomotion. This information may then be transferred
out through the skin to a small external receiving device accessible
to the patient.
In vivo nanodevices can also join together to form coordinated
aggregates which may be large enough to emulate the action of a
macroscale communications device. In some instances, this approach
will produce only energy-inefficient marginally-feasible results. For
example, consider the concept of the subdermal nanospeaker or
“talking tattoo.” The minimum acoustic power output that can be
heard as a whisper is ~0.1 microwatts (Section 4.9.1.5). From Eqn.
7.7, a 1-micron acoustic radiator driven by 1000 pW of input power
at 3000 Hz produces ~4 x 10-18 watts/radiator. The sound waves
then lose 99.9% of their power passing through the skin-air interface
(Section 4.9.1.6), so ~22 trillion devices are required to generate
the required ~0.1 microwatt (by coherent emission) in order to be
heard. But this many 1000-pW devices operated simultaneously
produce 22,000 watts, well in excess of the suggested 100-watt
whole-body thermogenic maximum. However, if the radiators
position themselves near the skull to employ bone conduction into
the tympanum, most of the skin-air interface loss is avoided reducing
the required radiator count to 22 billion and total power to 22 watts,
which might be acceptable. Such radiator nanorobots occupying
10% of local tissue volume make a patch ~350 microns deep covering
the area of a postage stamp (~1 inch2
). (Skin-air interface losses
may also be avoided by acoustic nanoradiators positioned exclusively
supraepidermally.) The “talking wristwatch” approach (Section
7.4.2.7) is another possibility.
A more efficient nanorobot-aggregate user interface is the
programmable dermal display. Pigment tattoos,96 port-wine stains,
strawberry marks (common hemangiomas), and other birthmarks
constitute an existence proof that small biocompatible particles can
be permanently implanted in the dermis and do not migrate on
timescales of decades or longer. This suggests that dermal displays
can be positionally stable over very lengthy periods of time.
Consider a population of ~3 billion display nanorobots embedded
200-300 microns below the surface of the epidermis covering a 6
cm x 5 cm rectangle on the flat part of the back of the hand or on
the smooth medial surface of the forearm. The nanorobots are ~1
micron3 in volume and occupy only 1% of the 300 mm3 local tissue
deployment volume. Each device consumes ~10 pW when generating
visible photons of desired colors at a comfortable visible intensity of
~1 pW/micron2 or ~1 watt/m2 (Section 5.3.7), assuming an
improved 10% ergooptical conversion efficiency. Visible photons are
completely scattered in 10-100 microns but almost none are absorbed,
producing a diffuse glow as ~50% of the scattered photons eventually
exit the surface of the skin. For installation and stationkeeping,
display nanodevices require at least limited mobility, and a few
additional nanodevices may be required to assist with computation,
* The tips of rod cells are renewed at the end of each night, the tips of cone cells at the end of each day, as regulated by the diurnal circadian clock (Section 10.1.1).1664
Resident nanorobots should avoid being sloughed off during this process.
Basic Capabilities • Communication 205
data storage and external communications, and other housekeeping
chores.
If powered by continuously available chemical fuels, the display
would only be operable for 0.1-10 sec before exhausting the entire
oxyglucose supply present in the limited tissue deployment volume.
Consequently, it is necessary to include a large energy storage buffer
constituting 40% of device volume (assuming 1010 joule/m3 stored
energy density; Section 6.2.3) which allows ~1000 sec of operation
if only 20% of all pixels are radiating at any given time. This power
can be reabsorbed from local oxyglucose supplies in ~1 day, giving a
long-term ~1% duty cycle for the display (~14 min/day) although
the buffer can operate the display for up to ~21 minutes before
being exhausted. This power restriction may be entirely avoided by
adding supplemental power from, say, a wristwatch-sized extradermal
acoustic source (Section 6.4.1), a dedicated transvascular energy
organ (Section 6.4.4), photoelectric collectors (~30 pW/micron2 in
cloudless noontime sunlight, ~1 pW/micron2 in a well-lighted room;
Sections 4.9.4 and 6.3.6), or by employing a passive (reflective) display
which might be satisfactory for some purposes.
The array of 3 billion nanorobots may be programmed to
adopt any of many thousands of different displays. Each display
configuration is capable of
1. presenting output data received from the larger in vivo nanorobot
population scattered throughout the body (via a communication
network), and
2. accepting input data from the patient to be conveyed (through
the communication network) to appropriate internal nanorobot
subpopulations.
Full-motion animation or video may also be projected, up to the
107 bit/sec maximum limit of the mobile communication network;
fiber networks may allow up to ~109 bit/sec data transfer rates (Section
7.3.1). Figure 7.7A shows a small sample of alternative displays (at
actual size) from among the many thousands that are conceivable.
Acquisition of the information displayed requires a population of
Fig. 7.7A. A selection of possible dermal display screens.
206 Nanomedicine • Volume I
sensory nanodevices distributed throughout the body and linked
by a communications network. For instance, the “Vital Signs” panel
requires at least one telemetering nanorobot stationed in each of
the several hundred arteries of the human body (or possibly behind
each vein valve cusp (Fig. 8.3) throughout the venous system), with
each device reporting local blood pressure conditions on a
periodic basis.
As for the display itself, in the first example (“Messager/Calculator”) there are 60 input keys measuring (0.5 cm)2 each and a 2
cm x 6 cm output panel that can print 7 rows of 30 characters, each
character measuring (2 mm)2 with 1 mm of blank space between
each line. Line segments used to write characters are 500 microns
wide, more than ten times the limit of human visual acuity at a
reading distance of 30 cm; ~500 million active nanorobots participate
in drawing the images of the 60 input keys. Display nanorobots
have a mean separation of ~5 microns in the tissue but remeasure
their relative positions at least ten times per second; a finger-touch
on an input key (Fig. 7.7B) depresses the skin by ~500 microns,
producing massive and easily detectable displacements of the
underlying nanodevices from which the chosen key may be inferred.
Non-message related skin stretchings and proximate limb flexures
are readily distinguished from input fingerings. The display is
activated or deactivated by using finger tapping on the epidermis,
temporally coded handclaps or other similar means, and becomes
invisible under the epidermis when unilluminated and not in use.
The display may be partly obscured by excessive body hair or
particularly dark dermal pigmentation. Post-installation bruises,
scabs, incisions, scars, or even wrinkling on the back of the hand
may slightly or temporarily impair readability. But nanorobot
stationkeeping allows maintenance of near-perfect feature geometry
during any trauma short of major avulsion or excision wounds
involving significant loss of tissue, deep burns, or outright dermal
excoriation or flaying.
In 1998 the closest analogous technology was an all-digital
chip-mounted ~1 cm2 projection display, created by Texas Instruments,
which operated by independently twisting 307,200 individual tiny
mirrors, each measuring 16 microns square, through ±10˚,
reflecting pulses of colored light onto a screen.1062,1974
Wristwatch-sized personal status monitors for regular biomonitoring
were being developed by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) in the United States,3301 and in the private sector
for sports medicine.3323
7.4.7 Outmessaging to External Receivers
Much of the extensive self-diagnostic data that could theoretically
be made available to the patient via dermal displays (Fig. 7.7) is
probably beyond the comprehension of the typical user and thus
will require professional interpretation. All such information may
be rapidly downloaded to instruments under the physician’s control
via a wide variety of outmessaging transducers including cable
connections through transdermal output ports (Section 7.4.2.7),
magnetic induction, infrared or acoustic links with internal communications organs (Section 7.3.4), or dermal displays configured for
optimal high-capacity optical external data transfers. Physicians
might also receive information from in vivo nanorobots which
generate subtle physiological patterns (e.g., an artificial electrical or
mechanical signal superimposed on the normal cardiac or respiratory
“carrier wave”) requiring sensitive clinical diagnostic equipment to
detect, though of course great care must be taken to ensure that
such imposed patterns are non-nosogenic. Nanorobots could operate
an implanted radio transmitter.
Artificial data secretion glands or other distributed data secretion
sources may write huge quantities of data onto nonmetabolizable
messenger molecules which are then excreted by the patient, recovered
from the urine by laboratory nanodevices, then passed through a
reading device, thus making the information available to the physician.
A minimum urine flow of ~120 cm3
/day containing Dmessage ~ 26
bits/nm3 messenger molecules (Section 7.2.1.1) at an innocuous
concentration of only 100 parts per million by volume allows a data
stream of ~4 x 1015 bits/sec to flow from patient to physician—
subject to unavoidable time delays for excretion, materials processing
and message extraction. The total power requirement to originally
encode this information in vivo is 1-1000 zJ/bit (Section 7.2.6) or
4-4000 microwatts for the entire stream, well within safe whole-body
thermogenic limits. This technique may be especially valuable in
long-term whole-body monitoring, neural recording and archiving
(Chapter 25), and related data-intensive applications that require
acquisition of information streams from millions or billions of
scattered individual in vivo data-gathering sources.
Many of the inmessaging techniques summarized in Section 7.4.1
may also be operated in reverse to achieve outmessaging to the
physician from in vivo nanodevices.
Fig. 7.7B. A dermal display screen in use.
Basic Capabilities • Communication 207
7.4.8 Transvenue Outmessaging
Can nanorobots stationed inside one patient communicate with
nanorobots stationed inside another patient? Other than simple
linkages of previously described standard inmessaging and
outmessaging modalities, remote communication between two fully
physically disjoint sets of intracorporeal nanorobots can probably
be ruled out. However, in vivo and epidermal nanorobots can in
theory be programmed to take advantage of serendipitous
opportunities using mobile communicytes. Such opportunities for
extracorporeal contacts may include patient-to-patient communicyte
exchange by direct physical contact (e.g., handshaking or sexual
activity), by indiscriminate broadcast transfers (e.g., sneezing,
bleeding, desquamation, or sharing tools or utensils), by serendipitous
anonymous contacts (e.g., doorknobs, public toilet seats, library
books), or by deliberate airborne nanorobot migrations (Section
9.5.3). Security protocols (Chapter 12) are especially important in
these applications.
Data is also readily transferred purposely between patients, as
for example via matching dermal communications patches embedded
in the palms of each patient’s hands which are briefly pressed
together while shaking hands. In 1998, IBM’s Personal Area Network
(PAN) used near-field oscillating galvanic potentials with a low carrier
frequency (~330 KHz), inducing ~50 picoamp currents from a ~1.5
milliwatt power source, to exchange a few hundred bytes of personal
data between users during a handshake.2700
Communication among large numbers of airborne exodermal
nanorobots (Section 9.5.3) is a particularly interesting and useful
application (e.g., Chapter 21). Such communication may be
accomplished by chemical means (Section 8.6.2), but here we will
review only optical and acoustic methods.
Consider a cloud of aerial nanorobots with number density nbot
(nanorobots/m3
) and mean separation Xpath = nbot
-1/3 (meters) that
is stationkeeping around a human user (Section 9.5.3). Each
nanorobot has a communications energy budget of Pcomm (watts)
and broadcasts photons (or sound waves) of frequency ν from a
circular transmitter of radius rantenna to a receiver of similar size
located a mean distance Xpath away.
In the case of optical communication, the information transfer
rate I may be regarded as the number of photons received per second from a neighboring device, or

˙
I ~ ( /sec) e% P r
4 h X comm antenna
2
path
2 ν
bits {Eqn. 7.21}
where e% is the ergophotonic efficiency of photon generation and
h = 6.63 x 10-34 joule-sec (Planck’s constant). Conservatively taking
e% = 0.01(1%), Pcomm = 10 pW, rantenna = 1 micron, and assuming
red photons with ν = 4.3 x 1014 Hz (λ = 700 nm, ~280 zJ/photon),
then inter-nanorobot I ~ 10 bits/sec for Xpath = 100 microns, or nbot
= 1012 nanorobots/m3
. A nanorobot cloud of this density should
appear visually dense, possibly nearly opaque, since 1012 nanorobots
each of cross-sectional area ~π rantenna2 ~ 3 micron2 may occult >1 m2
looking through a 1 m3 cubic cloud having a face area of 1 m2
. The
maximum broadcast optical intensity of a ~1 meter column uniformly
distributed at this number density is ~0.1 watts/m2
, which is safe
for the human eye. Nanorobot cloud waste heat at this number density,
due to communications activities, is ~10 watts/m3
.
In the case of acoustic communication, the efficiency of
ergoacoustic transmission efficiency e% = Pout / Pin, as defined by
Eqn. 7.7, and the input power budget for communication Pcomm = Pin
from Eqn. 7.9, except that in air the exponential attenuation must
be replaced with e2 αair ν2 Xpath as described in Section 4.9.1.3 for
pure fluids. Using variables as previously defined, then I ~ ν fduty
and

P f
24 v X kT e
k r e (watts) comm duty
sound path
2 SNR
2
r antenna
5
2 X air
2
path = 





η
π ρ ν
α ν
{Eqn. 7.22}
which is valid in pure fluids if rantenna/λ << 1. We assume η = 0.018
x 10-3 kg/m-sec and vsound ~ 343 m/sec for air at 20˚C,763 kT ~ 4.3
zJ, SNR = 2, kr = 2 for a piston radiator, ρ = 1.3 kg/m3
, rantenna = 1
micron, and αair = 1.4 x 10-10 sec2
/m (Table 4.2). For any given
Xpath, there is an optimum transmission frequency ν that minimizes
Pcomm.* Taking Xpath = 100 microns (nbot = 1012 nanorobots/m3
),
internanorobot I ~ 40 bits/sec at an optimum frequency of 4.2 MHz
and fduty = 0.001% duty cycle (Pcomm ~ 7 pW). Note that Eqn. 7.22
is extremely sensitive to antenna size. At rantenna = 2 microns, I ~
2000 bits/sec at 4.2 MHz for Xpath = 100 microns.
What is the maximum acoustic intensity at the ear? Measuring
from the outermost boundary of the nanorobot cloud and moving
inward, ultrasound power extinguishes rapidly, falling to an intensity
e-1 (~37%) in a distance λx = (2 αair ν2
)
-1 ~ 200 microns at ν = 4.2
MHz. If the nearest boundary of the cloud is maintained a distance
Xear from the tympanic membrane of the human ear, then the acoustic
intensity reaching the eardrum surface is approximately:

I ~P e cloud comm bot x
-X / η ear x λ λ ( /) watts m2 {Eqn. 7.23}
If the cloud fills the auditory canal, then Xear = 0 and Icloud ~ 10-3
watts/m2 (~93 dB, “shouting”), which is probably safe enough for
the human ear and is inaudible at 4.2 MHz. At Xear = 3 mm, Icloud
~ 10-9 watts/m2 (~30 dB, “whispering”); if the cloud remains
entirely outside the auditory canal, then Xear ~ 2 cm and Icloud
~ 10-46 watts/m2
.
Photonic or acoustic modalities may serve as the basis for ex
vivo mobile communication networks (Section 7.3.2). Since bit rates
are significantly enhanced by proximity (e.g., smaller Xpath), it may
be useful to assign circumcorporeal aerial nanorobots to condensed
geometric or traffic patterns, and to allow opportunistic conferencing
among them as required, which might appear to the user as irregular or
stellate aggregations, diaphanous tendrils, ordered rows or clump
arrays at Cartesian grid vertices, evanescent toroidal cloudlets, or
other floating geometries conducive to rapid and effective data sharing.
In the earlier examples given above, reducing Xpath to 10 microns
raises the optical transfer rate to 900 bits/sec and the acoustic transfer
rate to 50,000 bits/sec at 13.4 MHz, for rantenna = 1 micron.
These modalities could also be used by a circumcorporeal
nanorobot cloud to communicate visual and auditory messages
directly to the user.
*Airborne nanorobots traveling at a ∆v ~ 1 m/sec relative velocity will incur a Doppler shift in the received frequency of ν (1 + (∆v / vsound)) ~ (1.003) ν, defining a ± 3 KHz per
MHz band bracketing the intended frequency.
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 8
Navigation
8.1 Navigating the Human Body
I
t is difficult to imagine any significant application of medical
nanodevices which does not involve navigation, however crude.
Devices intended to monitor somatic states, assemble artificial
internal structures, remove tumors or foreign matter, combat
infections, or perform repairs, must normally be extremely tissue- or
cell-specific. Navigation is also required to execute many control
protocols (Chapter 12), to locate dedicated energy, communication, or
navigational helper organs, or to stationkeep and coordinate with
other nanodevices. Even bloodborne nanorobots intended to operate
solely at the systemic level—such as nanobiotics or immunocytes
(Chapter 19) and respirocytes (artificial red cells;1400 Chapter 22)—
must know if they have been prematurely ejected from the vasculature
so that they may cease functioning or at least modify their activities.
Perhaps the most important challenge of in vivo navigation is to
determine how physicians may best direct nanorobots to specific
target sites needing treatment within the human body. Two alternative
strategies appear most likely to produce the best clinical results (both
of which will be considered in this Chapter).
The first strategy is positional navigation, in which the nanorobot
knows its position inside the human body to ~micron accuracy at
all times in some clinic-centered or body-centered coordinate grid
system. The nanodevice relies upon dead reckoning, cartotaxis,
microtransponder network alignment, or triangulation on external
beacon signals to establish its position continuously. This method
requires some onboard computation, at least a basic set of sensors
(e.g., acoustic), and probably also a good clock (Section 10.1).
However, it is hardly foolproof—if the target coordinates are poorly
specified or the beacon signals are misaligned or poorly calibrated,
the nanorobots may go to the wrong place.
The second strategy is functional navigation, in which
nanodevices seek to detect subtle variations in their environment,
comparing diverse sensor readings with the profile of the target tissue
or cell and congregating wherever this very precisely defined set of
preconditions exists. These preconditions may be thermal, acoustic
or barostatic, cytochemical or immunochemical, mechanical or
topological, or even genetic. The crudest forms of functional navigation may be called demarcation, wherein the doctor manually creates
detectable artificial conditions at or near the target site such as dermal
hot spots, injected chemical plumes, or focused ultrasonic beam
spots of appropriate magnitudes and frequencies. Demarcation
strategies can be implemented using extremely simple onboard sensors
and control devices, possibly not even requiring a nanorobot computer,
thus may prove useful early in nanomedical technology development.
More sophisticated forms of functional navigation can be
extraordinarily flexible because targets may be specified without the
physician having to know their exact physical location in the body—
e.g., nascent cancer tumors, T cells reactive to specific antigens,
infected deep-thoracic lymph nodes, bacteria of a particular species,
broken capillary vessels, or virus particles having a specified protein
coat chemistry. The physician need not know the exact number of
targets, nor even if any targets are present at all. These forms of
functional navigation require onboard computation, a resident
database of relevant parameters and operational details, and a wider
assortment of sensors and control protocols. But they also offer the
greatest benefit at lowest risk for the patient and thus must be
regarded as the preferred approach once the technology is available.
This Chapter opens with a survey of human somatography
(Section 8.2), followed by general discussions of positional (Section
8.3) and functional (Section 8.4) navigation, cytonavigation (Section
8.5), and finally ex vivo navigation (Section 8.6).
8.2 Human Somatography
Somatography is, quite simply, the “geography” or map of the
anatomical spaces, as seen from the viewpoint of a microscopic traveler
in those realms. The human body is a complex and fascinating place
to visit. The nanomedical theater of operations in adult patients
may range in size from an extremely small ~0.005 m3 (Lucia Zarate,
5.9 kg, in January 1883 at age 20) to an extremely large ~0.5 m3
(Robert Earl Hughes, 485 kg, in February 1958 at age 32),739 but
averages ~0.06 m3 of navigable volume for the standard 70 kg adult
male having 15% body fat, medium build and good health.817 (The
more typical tall but overweight late 20th-century American male
(6-ft, 220 lbs, 25% body fat) measures ~0.1 m3 in size.) Thus the
volume normally available for nanorobot navigation in a single
patient is ~1017 microns3
.
The first fully digitized comprehensive three-dimensional map
of the human body was compiled in the early 1990s as part of the
National Library of Medicine’s Visible Human Project.1304 During
this effort, a male and female cadaver were frozen in blocks of gel,
sectioned into thousands of thin slices and digitally scanned in MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging), CT (computerized x-ray tomography)
and anatomical modes (optical photography), slice by slice.
The male data set, released in 1994, consists of axial MRI
images of the head and neck taken at 4 mm intervals and longitudinal
sections of the rest of the body also at 4 mm intervals; each MRI
image is 256 x 256 pixels with a 12-bit grey scale per pixel. The CT
data consists of 512 x 512 pixel axial CT scans of the entire body
taken at 1 mm intervals, also with a 12-bit grey scale per pixel. The
axial anatomical images are 2048 x 1216 pixels with a 24-bit color
scale per pixel, representing ~60 megabits per image. The anatomical
cross-sections are also at 1 mm intervals and coincide with the CT
axial images. There are 1871 cross-sections for each mode (CT and
anatomy) obtained from the male cadaver, a ~0.112 terabit data set
for the anatomical images (~111 million micron3
 per voxel).
210 Nanomedicine • Volume I
The female data set, released in 1995, has the same characteristics as
the male set except that the axial anatomical images were obtained
at 0.33 mm intervals instead of 1.0 mm intervals, resulting in more
than 5,000 anatomical images and a data set of ~0.336 terabits.
Even though this map has a resolution of only 37 million micron3
per voxel, this is still sufficient to resolve all terminal veins and terminal
arterial branches in the body and all major gross anatomical features,
and thus provides a good start toward a human somatographic
atlas.
A complete human somatographic static map to cellular resolution
in theory requires ~20 micron increments, a ~100 terabit data set
using 8-bit 8000 micron3 voxels assuming a fixed scanning geometry
and ignoring the indexing tables. Recording all major structural
details in the capillary terminal bed demands ~4 micron resolution,
a ~10,000 terabit data set assuming 8-bit voxels. A 10,000 terabit
data set may be stored on a ~26 bit/nm3 hydrofluorocarbon memory
tape (Section 7.2.1.1) in a cubic volume of ~(72 micron)3 within
an in vivo ~(100 micron)3 library nodule. Divided into ~106 independent spools, a datum located anywhere on the 3300-kilometer total
tape length could be accessed in ~10 seconds assuming a read speed
of ~30 cm/sec (Section 7.2.6). A smaller 100 terabit library nodule
requires only ~(16 micron)3 of tape, with ~1000 spools and similar
access times as in the previous example. Topological or functional
mapping may permit data compression by a factor of 10-100 (e.g.,
Sections 8.2.1.2 and 8.3.2) without increasing access time or seriously reducing map utility.
A 1 micron3 storage block that could conveniently be carried
aboard an individual medical nanorobot can hold ~0.01 terabits
(Section 7.2.6), enough memory to contain a three-dimensional
map of the entire human body to ~430 micron resolution or a map
of a 1-kg organ to ~100 micron resolution, using 8-bit voxels. The
required resolution for a given application is very mission-dependent.
Additionally, two types of map are likely to be of value. The first is
a precise static map of some generic reference cadaver, as described
above, that may provide general navigational guidance. The second
is a detailed map of the individual patient, assembled by exploratory or
“surveyor” nanorobots (Chapter 19) prior to the deployment of
therapeutic nanorobots which would be given this information to
allow very specific navigational guidance. Map stability is an
important issue (Section 8.2.1.2; Chapter 19).
The remainder of this Section offers a quick guided tour of the
larger navigable volumes inside the human body, along with some
useful quantitative details. The different regions of the body appear
to have enough structural and chemical dissimilarity to allow a
nanorobot traversing these volumes to determine its position to at
least ~mm accuracy, based solely on simple landmark recognition,
chemonavigational cues, and bifurcation and topological information,
even without resorting to the precision positional systems described
in Section 8.3.
8.2.1 Navigational Vasculography
Medical nanorobots may access the interior of the human body
principally via the blood-carrying vasculature, representing ~5.4
liters or ~9% of total body volume. The blood vessels are of three
types, each characterized by functional and structural differences.
First, there is the high-pressure distributing system, made up of the
arteries and smaller branches called arterioles, which convey oxygenated blood from the heart to all regions of the body (Section 8.2.1.1).
Second, there is a network of minute vessels, called capillaries,
through which biologically important materials are exchanged
between blood and tissues (Section 8.2.1.2). Third, there is a
low-pressure collecting system made up of veins and smaller branches
called venules, which return the blood to the heart (Section 8.2.1.1).
The lymphatic system, an additional 3.3 liters of very low-pressure
vasculature (Section 8.2.1.3), returns cell-filtered plasma to the main
circulatory system.
8.2.1.1 Arteriovenous Macrocirculation
Topologically, the arteriovenous circulatory system resembles a
“figure-eight” with a four-chambered heart positioned at the central
junction. In the top half of the “figure-eight,” oxygen-depleted blood
is pumped from the heart to the lungs via the pulmonary artery.
Oxygen-rich blood leaves the lungs and returns to the heart via the
left and right pulmonary veins. In the bottom half of the
“figure-eight,” oxygen-rich blood received from the lungs is pumped
into the aorta for distribution to the tissues, as shown in Figure 8.1.
Oxygen-depleted blood is collected by the venous network (Fig.
8.2) and returns to the heart via the vena cava. (In both Figures,
superficial vessels are drawn as solid lines and deep vessels as broken
lines.) Most veins 1 mm in diameter or larger are fitted with a series
of one-way valves to prevent backflow (Fig. 8.3). Such valves are
most numerous in the lower extremities: the vena cava and the
mesenteric, pulmonary and portal veins. Arteries have no valves.
The smaller arteries are heavily anastomosed except across the midline
of the body.
Table 8.1 provides a summary of the ~19,000 kilometers of
human arteriovenous vasculature (mostly capillaries); additional data
for a few selected major vessels is in Table 8.2. Singhal et al828 have
carefully surveyed the complete branching structure of the pulmonary
arterial network, spanning the entire range from principal artery to
final capillary (Table 8.3). These data may provide a useful model
for estimating capillary branching systems in other tissues, bearing
in mind that pulmonary capillaries are generally wider and shorter
than capillaries found elsewhere in the body, and that capillary bed
geometries are unique to each organ (Section 8.2.1.2). The measured
thickness of the glycocalyx of the endothelium of the systemic
Fig. 8.1. Human arterial system.
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 211
arteries and vena cava may also be utilized for navigational purposes.
For example, the thickness of rabbit glycocalyx ranged from 45 ± 1
nm in the coronary artery to 81 ± 2 nm in the carotid; the glycocalyx
was 20 ± 1.5 nm thicker on the downstream side of intercostal ostia
than on the upstream side.3164
How much time does a nanorobot flowing with the blood take
to transit individual organs and the entire vascular circuit? It is
generally accepted that the round-trip circulation time through the
entire “figure-eight” averages ~60 seconds under resting conditions,398
a time that appears constant for nearly all mammals.362 During heavy
exercise, the minimum circulation time may fall to 11-15 sec along
most pathways primarily due to vasodilation.
Tissue transit times have been widely studied.839 For example,
bloodborne particles in the lung normally take only 1-2 seconds to
pass the alveolar sheet but 5-10 seconds to transit the entire pulmonary
vasculature.361,780 Lung transit time is not significantly reduced if
heart rate is simply increased;829 however, during strenuous exercise
the alveolar transit time falls to 0.3 sec and the maximum lung transit
time falls from 10 sec to 2 sec due to vasodilation. Organ transit
times are dominated by capillary flow speeds which range from
0.20-1.50 mm/sec (Table 8.2). Given that capillaries average ~1
mm in length, minimum organ transit times are 0.7-5.0 seconds.
8.2.1.2 Arteriovenous Microcirculation
In most cases, the true capillaries do not directly join arterioles
to venules. Rather, oxygenated blood passes out of the terminal
branches of the arterioles (terminal arterioles are ~10-50 microns in
diameter) into metarterioles (10-20 microns), “preference channels”
whose walls contain smooth muscle fibers in declining numbers
from proximal to distal, which eventually merge with the
non-contractile postcapillary (8-30 micron) and collecting (10-50
micron) venules (Fig. 8.4). Capillaries branch off directly from the
metarterioles through precapillary sphincters constructed of single
muscle fibers; other than these, there are no contractile elements in the
capillaries. The state of contraction of the sphincters controls the
rate of fluid flow through the capillaries. In skeletal muscle, with its
widely varying oxygen requirements, there are 8-10 capillaries per
metarteriole; in the mesenteric circulation, a stable metabolism
requires only 2-3 capillaries per metarteriole; in the nail bed, the
ratio is 1:1.832The topology of the arterioles that supply the capillaries,
and of the venules that drain them, is usually special for each tissue.
Some beds are structured as trees, while others are organized into
arcades, sinuses, or portal systems. Thus the vasculature of each
organ is unique—useful navigational information for medical
nanorobots.
The wall of a capillary vessel is a tube consisting of a single layer
of rolled-up endothelial cells. Endothelial cells may be less than 1
micron thick with a flat surface area of 300-1200 micron2
, so the
entire ~313 meter2 vascular surface may be comprised of up to 0.25-1
trillion endothelial cells. Endothelial cells are laterally apposed to
each other with a 10-20 nm gap between neighboring cell membranes.
These junctions are also somewhat organ-unique. There are three
major types.
1. First, there is the continuous type with cells joined tightly together.
Striated muscles may have flat thin cells, while in postcapillary
venules the cells are cuboidal, forming a thick layer.
2. Second, there is the fenestrated type, with cells so thin that
internal vesicles form small pores 25 nm thick and 100 nm in
diameter (typically ~1000 pores/micron2, compared to ~190
pores/micron2 in arteriole endothelium and ~645 pores/micron2
in postcapillary venule endothelium ).838 This type is found in
the renal medulla, endocrine glands, and in structures engaged
in the production or absorption of fluids such as the renal
glomerulus, choroid plexus of the brain, and the intestinal villus.
3. Third, there is the discontinuous type with distinct intercellular
gaps and a broken basement membrane, commonly found in
sinusoid vessels and in organs such as the liver, spleen, and bone
marrow whose functions include injection or extraction of whole
cells, large molecules and extraneous particles from the blood.
Capillaries average 8 microns in diameter, but what is the
minimum human capillary diameter? This question is important
because it sets an upper limit on the size of bloodborne nanorobots.
For example, in one experiment 97% of all 15-micron radiolabelled
Fig. 8.2. Human venous system.
Fig. 8.3. Vein valve architecture.
212 Nanomedicine • Volume I
microspheres reaching the eye were trapped during the first pass.842
Standard anatomy and physiology textbooks variously report that
the minimum capillary lumen measures 5-7 microns,834,839 4-9
microns,836 4-8 microns,517 or 4-6 microns841,843 in diameter. There
are also references to capillaries as narrow as 3 microns for laboratory
rodents and other mammals.834,840
Theoretical calculations841,844 suggest that a cylindrical vessel
must be at least 2.7 microns in diameter to allow maximally
deforming human red cells normally averaging 7.82 microns in
diameter 362 to pass. This theoretical minimum assumes a mean cell
(surface) area (MCA) of ~135 micron2 and a mean cell volume
(MCV) of ~94 micron3 for human erythrocytes, and allows for a
maximum surface stretch of 10 micron2 to a total of MCA ~ 145
micron2
.* From simple geometry for a red cell compressed into a
hemisphere-capped cylinder during tube passage, the minimum tube
diameter Dtube is given by

MCV MCA
4 D
12
D (m ) tube tube
3 3 = 

 

 − 

 

 π {Eqn. 8.1}
Experiments using polycarbonate sieves and micropipettes confirm
that a tube diameter of at least 2.3 microns is necessary to avoid
plugging.374
However, the above theoretical computation assumes mean erythrocyte geometry and ignores the considerable dispersion in volume and
surface area of individual physiological red cells around the mean value.
Specifically, the largest 1% of human red cells have diameter dRBC ~
9.65 microns, MCA ~ 182 micron2 and MCV ~ 132 micron3
, 362
Table 8.1. Approximate Quantification of the Human Arteriovenous System830-833,835,836,838,1616
Diameter Length Wall Internal Number Total Total Surface Total Blood
Human Blood Vessel (mm) (mm) Thickness Pressure of Vessels Length (mm) Area (mm2
) Volume (mm3
)
Aorta 25.0 400 1500 µm 100 mmHg 1 400 31,400 200,000
Large arteries 6.5 200 1000 µm 100 mmHg 40 8000 163,000 260,000
Main artery branches 2.4 100 800 µm 95 mmHg 500 50,000 377,000 220,000
Terminal artery branches 1.2 10 125 µm 90 mmHg 11,000 110,000 415,000 120,000
Arterioles 0.1 2 20 µm 60 mmHg 4,500,000 9,000,000 2,800,000 70,000
Capillaries 0.008 1 1 µm 30 mmHg 19,000,000,000 19,000,000,000 298,000,000 375,000
Venules 0.15 2 2 µm 20 mmHg 10,000,000 20,000,000 9,400,000 355,000
Terminal veins 1.5 10 40 µm 15 mmHg 11,000 110,000 518,000 190,000
Main venous branches 5.0 100 500 µm 15 mmHg 500 50,000 785,000 1,590,000
Large veins 14.0 200 800 µm 10 mmHg 40 8000 352,000 1,290,000
Vena cava 30.0 400 1200 µm 5 mmHg 1 400 37,700 280,000
Heart chambers -- -- -- 120 mmHg -- -- -- 450,000
TOTALS ~19,000 km 312,900,000 5,400,000
hypothetical male, age 30, weight 70 kg, blood volume 5.4 liters
Table 8.2. Additional Data on Selected Blood Vessels386,834
Mean Mean Flow Velocity Mean Tube
Blood Vessel Diameter Flow Rate Velocity Range Reynolds
or Element (mm) (mm3
/sec) (mm/sec) (mm/sec) Number
Ascending aorta 23.0-43.5 364,000 630 245-876 3210-6075
Inferior vena cava 20.0 34,000-50,000 135 107-160 323-482
Descending aorta 16.0-20.0 54,000-85,000 270 -- 1200-1500
Common carotid 5.9 5100 187 99-388 332
Carotid sinus 5.2 3300 156 85-325 244
Femoral artery 5.0 3700 188 -350 to 1175 283
External carotid 3.8 1800 157 83-327 180
Large veins 5-10 4000-12,000 150-200 -- 210-570
Large arteries 2-6 1600-5700 200-500 -- 110-850
Small arteries 0.3 3.5 50 -- 2.3
Arterioles 0.025-0.10 0.025 5 -- 0.038
Capillaries 0.004-0.015 0.000075 0.2-1.5 0.00036
to 0.00057 to 0.0027
* Different species have red cells differing slightly in diameter, thickness, surface area and volume.840 For example, dogs have 7.2-micron red cells with MCA ~ 123 micron2
and MCV ~ 69 micron3
, giving (assuming surface elasticity characteristics similar to the human erythrocyte) a theoretical minimum passable tube diameter of 2.4 microns.
Cats have 5.6-micron red cells with MCA ~ 83 micron2
 and MCV ~ 43 micron3
, giving Dtube ~ 2.2 microns, a full 0.5 micron less than for human red cells.
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 213
giving a theoretical minimum passable tube diameter Dtube ~ 3.1 microns for these cells. The largest cell in a population of 108 cells
(there are a total of ~300,000 of these largest cells in circulation at
any given time, a not inconsiderable number) has dRBC ~ 16 microns, MCA ~ 500 micron2
, MCV ~ 450 micron3
,
362 giving Dtube ~
3.7 microns. Thus if human capillaries were as small as 2.3-3.7 microns, a significant number of red cells would be unable to navigate
passage and would quickly plug the tubes, resulting in angionecrosis.
Experiments have also shown plugging by human leukocytes at tube
apertures much below ~5 microns.845,846Thus the minimum viable
human capillary diameter appears to be ~4 microns.
The average density of capillaries in human tissue is ~600/
mm3
,
832 which implies a mean separation of ~40 microns between
adjacent capillaries averaging ~1 mm in length. Most living tissue
cells lie within ~1-3 cell widths of a capillary. To reach a particular
cell, bloodborne nanorobots may normally travel most of the distance
through the vascular network, then exit the capillary and cross at
most one or two cells to reach the desired target cell. Capillary density
varies considerably in the vascular beds of different organs. For
instance, microvascular density is 2500-3000/mm3 in the brain,
kidneys, liver, and myocardium; 300-400/mm3 in phasic units of
the skeletal musculature; and <100/mm3 in bone, fat, connective
tissue, and in tonic units of the skeletal musculature.832 Blood flow
rate per gram of tissue (Table 8.4) is very roughly proportional to
the relative microvascular density in each organ or tissue. More than
70% of the water of the blood is exchanged with extravascular
water every minute—the walls of smaller capillaries are veritable
sieves with respect to water.2229
What is the size (in bits) of the minimum topological map needed
to reliably navigate the entire ~19,000 kilometers of human blood
vasculature? Map size is driven by the number of bifurcations (decision
junctions; see Section 8.3.4) and capillaries. Taking the pulmonary
arterial tree (Table 8.3) as representative, traveling from the heart to
a final capillary requires passage through approximately 17 forks
with an average of 3.2 branches per fork. In a simple bifurcation
map with 17 forks and at most 4 branches per fork, each capillary
can be assigned a unique topological address using 17 digits with
each digit having log2(4) = 2 bits, a 34-bit address vector. This
specification is very compact because the minimum number of bits
required to name each of 19 billion capillaries in the body is also
log2(19 billion vessels) ~ 34 bits. Using run-length coding, we can
have 417 addresses of length 34 bits, 416 addresses of length 32 bits,
and so forth, giving a whole-body minimum of: 34 bits (417) + 32
bits (416) + ... + 2 bits (41
) = 763,549,741,512 bits for a single
comprehensive bifurcation map.
Assuming some data redundancy (e.g., parity check bits) and an
allowance for special cases (e.g., arterial anastomoses, shunts, or
arteriovenous fistulas which are direct connections between a small
artery and a small vein), a complete map of the human vasculature
Table 8.3. Branching Structure of the Pulmonary Arterial Network Entering the Lungs828
Pulmonary Number Number Length Diameter
Branching of Branches of End Branches of Pulmonary of Pulmonary
Order of Each Order of Each Order Vessel (mm) Vessel (mm)
1 1 300,000,000 90.5 30.0
2 3 100,000,000 32.0 14.83
3 8 30,210,000 10.9 8.06
4 20 13,760,000 20.7 5.82
5 66 3,983,000 17.9 3.65
6 203 1,159,000 10.5 2.09
7 675 347,000 6.6 1.33
8 2290 89,160 4.69 0.85
9 5861 48,050 3.16 0.525
10 17,560 16,040 2.10 0.351
11 52,550 5358 1.38 0.224
12 157,400 1787 0.91 0.138
13 471,300 598 0.65 0.086
14 1,411,000 200 0.44 0.054
15 4,226,000 67 0.29 0.034
16 12,660,000 24 0.20 0.021
17 300,000,000 1 0.13 0.013
(alveolar)
Fig. 8.4. Metarterioles, venules, and lymph capillaries (redrawn from
Tortora853).
214 Nanomedicine • Volume I
probably requires ~1 terabit to store the addresses of all 19 billion
capillaries, with each address representing the unique navigational
instructions needed to reach each vessel. This allows localization to
within a ~50,000 micron3
 volume or ~(40 micron),3
 the approximate
volume of each capillary. However, map stability at the lowest levels
of the branching structure becomes a serious concern when the time
interval between map compilation and map use exceeds 105
-106 sec
(1-12 days), due to angiogenesis and other continuous natural tissue
remodeling activities, or in cases of tissue injury.
An arteriovenous vasculographic map might also provide an
excellent framework for determining cytographic location in the
body, since all tissue cells lie within a few diameters of a capillary
and each capillary services only 500 tissue cells. To make a complete
cytographic map, the number of bits required to uniquely name
each of the ~1013 tissue cells in the human body (Section 8.5.1) is
log2(1013 cells) ~ 43 bits; given similar allowances as before, 1000
terabits are required to store the navigational address of every fixed
cell in the body. Even using high-density hydrofluorocarbon memory
tape it does not appear feasible for individual bloodborne nanorobots
to carry a whole-body vasculographic or cytographic map onboard
(the latter of which might require ~40,000 micron3 of data storage
volume). However, a modest 0.1-micron3
 109
-bit map will allow a
bloodborne nanorobot to retain the addresses (with complete
navigational instructions) of up to 30 million individual capillaries
(~50 cm3 of typical tissue) or ~20 million individual cells (~0.2 cm3
of cell-dense tissue) for the duration of its mission. Note that
sequential passage through ~10 million different named capillaries
of average length ~1 mm at a swimming speed of ~1 cm/sec (Section
9.4.2.6) requires ~12 days, a not unreasonable mission duration.
8.2.1.3 Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system consists of a branching series of closed
endothelium-lined vessels. These vessels slowly drain lymph
(composition discussed below) from the extracellular spaces and
convey it back to the arteriovenous circulation, a sluggish current
easily navigated by lymphborne medical nanodevices. The lymphatic
vessels have a total capacity of ~2 liters of lymph,852 vs. ~3.7 liters
of fluid capacity for all the veins. No detailed quantitative summation
of the lymphatic system is readily available in the literature, so Table
8.5 must be regarded as an estimate consistent with data gleaned
from a variety of sources363,838,848,850,853-860,874 but possibly still
containing significant errors.
Lymphatic vessels resemble veins in structure but are greater in
number. Compared to veins, lymphatics of similar size have thinner
walls, more valves, much greater variation in their caliber but a less
sinuous course through the tissue. They also contain lymph nodes
at various intervals along their length. Lymph vessels are frequently
connected with one another by short anastomotic branches.857
Lymphatics of the skin travel in loose subcutaneous tissue and
generally follow veins and venules. Lymphatics of the viscera generally
follow arterioles, forming plexuses (extensive two-dimensional
meshworks) around them.
However, the lymph drainage system actually begins with the
prelymphatics. The prelymphatics are a randomly interconnected
network of non-endothelialized tissue channels 0.1-0.2 microns in
diameter penetrating the cell masses of the body, although in certain
regions where lymphatic capillaries are absent (e.g., the brain, eye,
and bone), the prelymphatics take over the role of the capillaries
and eventually discharge into them, outside the regions in question.861
In the viscera, these interstitial channels will normally be very short
since there are frequent arteriovenous and lymphatic capillaries—
for example, ~30 microns long in the capsules of knee joints
(~0.02-0.05 channels/micron3
). In the muscles, the prelymphatics
are longer since the lymphatic capillaries extend only into the larger
regions of connective tissue. In the brain the channels may be 10-30
cm long since they must reach (in the case of the brain) from the
depths of the cortex to the outside of the skull.861 Following injury,
tissue channel volume may enlarge as much as ~400 times in a week,
in response to a simple incision wound.1339
Drainage of the prelymphatics is done by the lymphatic capillaries,
thin-walled irregularly-contoured valveless endothelial tubes varying in
diameter from 15-75 microns. The lymphatic capillaries are blind
sacs (Fig. 8.4) with an inferred mean separation of ~86 microns or
~4 tissue cell widths. Their walls are more porous than those of
blood capillaries, so that larger molecules and particles may pass
(Fig. 8.5). The resting gap of the open junction of adjoining
lymphatic endothelial cells usually ranges from ~0.1 micron to several
microns.361 However, Allen851 injected intraperitoneally a variety of
particles of various sizes up to 22.5 microns in diameter, and all
sizes later appeared in the diaphragmatic lymph. This suggests that
the peritoneal mesothelium and the lymphatic endothelium on
either side of the fenestrations of the basement membrane can open
Table 8.4. Typical Blood Perfusion Rates for Various Tissues
and Organs818,837
Specific Blood
Flow Rate
Tissue Type Anatomical Location or Organ (mm3
/sec-gm)
Adipose tissue Abdomen, 10-29 mm thick 0.507
Abdomen, 30-49 mm thick 0.358
Abdomen, >40 mm thick 0.307
Thigh, 11 mm thick 0.93
Thigh, 20 mm thick 0.33
Thigh, 43 mm thick 0.15
Bone Humerus, marrow flow only 0.055
Connective tissue Typical, basal (max) 0.50 (2.5)
Joint Knee, avg. @ 303 K skin temp. 0.222
Knee, avg. @ 308 K skin temp. 0.487
Muscle Calf, anterior, resting flow (max) 0.46 (9.15)
Forearm, resting flow (max) 0.53 (8.38)
Thigh, anterior, resting flow (max) 0.43 (6.00)
Typical, basal (max) 0.50 (10.0)
Organ Brain, basal (max) 9.0-9.2 (18.3)
Gastrointestinal tract, basal (max) 6.7 (26.7)
Heart, basal (max) 13.3-14.0 (64.0)
Kidney, basal (max) 67-70 (100)
Liver, basal (max) 9.6-14.2 (54.5)
Lung, basal (max) 90 (490)
Skin Abdomen, resting flow 1.44
Arms, resting flow 1.40
Calf, resting flow 1.77
Face, resting flow 11.7
Foot, dorsal surface, resting flow 2.38
Forearm, sunburned (max) 9.22 (46.7)
Hands, resting flow 3.35
Head, resting flow 7.15
Thigh, resting flow 1.6
Thorax, resting flow 6.45
Typical, resting flow (max) 1.7 (25.0)
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 215
at least this wide, so micron-sized nanorobots should find easy passage
into the lymphatic system through these pores.
Lymph capillaries originate throughout the body, though not in
avascular tissue, the central nervous system, splenic pulp or bone
marrow. They may occur singly or in plexuses, especially in regions
where the connective tissue is lobulated (e.g., glands) or arranged in
cylinders (e.g., muscles). Each lymphatic capillary plexus is typically
320-640 microns wide, encompassing 2-6 blood capillary loops.
The terminal lymphatic network has different geometric patterns
in different tissues. In the mesentery, it conforms to the modular
configuration of the blood capillary network. In the skeletal muscle,
lymphatics are found in the immediate neighborhood of the arterioles;
in the dermis, near the venules. In the lung, the terminal lymphatics lie
at the junctions of interalveolar septa.363 Simple observation of the
local lymphocapillary topology (Section 8.3.4) might enable
nanorobots to identify which tissue they are passing through.
The precollecting ducts are short vascular segments with valves
(like all subsequent lymphatics) at intervals of 0.4-1.5 mm that
connect the capillary plexuses to the larger collecting ducts. The
lymphatic collecting ducts are denoted either prenodal or postnodal,
though there are no morphological or structural differences between
the two. Collecting ducts display many swellings and strictures along
their course which alter their profile, due to the presence of valves.
(Valve-counting may offer useful navigational information.) There
is an inner and an outer muscular layer. The collecting ducts empty
Table 8.5. Approximate Quantification of the Human Lymphatic System
Lymph Number of Total Total Lymph Flow
Human Lymphatic Vessel Diameter Length Wall Flow Rate Vessels, Tissues Length Volume Velocity
or Lymphatic Component (mm) (mm) Thickness (mm3
/sec) or Objects (mm) (mm3
) (µm/sec)
Cervical portals:
Thoracic duct 4.0 450 500 µm 21.4 1 450 5700 1700
Right lymphatic duct 3.0 14 500 µm 1.7 1 14 100 250
Main lymphatic trunks:
Subclavian (left & right) 2.5 50 ~300 µm 0.7 2 100 500 100
Jugular (left & right) 2.3 40 ~300 µm 0.7 2 80 330 200
Intestinal 2.3 85 ~300 µm 14.0 1 85 350 3400
Bronchomediastinal (left & right) 2.2 125 ~300 µm 2.0 2 250 950 500
Lumbar (right & left) 1.9 100 ~300 µm 0.3 2 100 570 100
Cisterna chyli (thoracic) 8-13 50-75 ~500 µm 14.0 1 60 1700 500
Minor lymphatic trunks: 1.0 10 ~100 µm 0.2 100 1000 800 300
Post-Lymphonodal collecting ducts 0.5 ~3 15-50 µm 0.01 1700 5100 1000 70
Pre-Lymphonodal collecting ducts 0.5 ~3 15-50 µm 4 x 10-5 617,000 1,850,000 363,000 0.2
Precollecting ducts 0.15 ~1 ~5 µm 3 x 10-7 68,000,000 68,000,000 1,200,000 0.02
Lymphatic capillaries 0.02 0.5 1 µm 3 x 10-7 6,800,000,000 3,400,000,000 425,000* 0.03
Lymphatics, subtotal 23.1 ~3500 km 2,000,000 ~10 (avg)
Pre-lymphatic channels 0.1-0.2 µm 30 µm- 30 cm -- 3 x 10-14 8 x 1014 24 x 1012 (370,000) 0.002
Lymphocytes ~10 µm -- -- -- 7 x 1011 -- (350,000) --
Lymph nodes 4.0 -- -- 0.05 450 -- (15,000) 10
Spleen 66 -- -- -- 1 -- (75,000) --
Thymus 22 -- -- -- 1 -- (10,000) --
Lymphatic vessel walls -- -- -- -- -- -- (460,000) --
Total Lymphatic System ~3,300,000
estimated for hypothetical adult male, weight 70 kg, consistent with references cited in text; * final volume after an assumed 90% fluid reabsorption
Fig. 8.5. Details of a lymph capillary (redrawn from Tortora853).
216 Nanomedicine • Volume I
into the lymphatic trunks, larger and thicker-walled vessels which
receive the lymph drained from entire regions of the body.
By their confluence, the lymphatics form progressively larger
vessels, which ultimately converge at two cervical portals (Fig. 8.6).
The first is the right lymphatic duct, which is relatively short and
typically opens into the right brachiocephalic vein at the junction of
the right internal jugular and right subclavian veins. It carries lymph
drainage from the right upper portion of the body (Fig. 8.7). The
second is the thoracic duct, which arises in the abdomen and courses
upward along the anterior aspect of the vertebral column (with valves
every ~3 cm along its length),857 through the thorax into the base of
the neck, where it typically joins the venous system at the junction
of the left jugular and subclavian veins. At its termination, a
bicuspid valve faces into the vein to prevent or
reduce reflux of blood, although after death blood regurgitates freely
into the thoracic duct, which then looks like a vein.
The thoracic duct is ~5 mm in diameter at its abdominal commencement, but becomes narrower at mid-thoracic levels, then in
~50% of patients grows slightly wider again before its termination.854
There is a tremendous variation in structure from one patient to
another. The duct may divide in its mid-course into two unequal
vessels which soon re-unite, or into several small branches which
form a plexus before combining again to form one short wide trunk.
Higher in the body, the duct occasionally bifurcates, the left branch
ending as usual, the right branch diverging to join one of the right
lymph trunks or even the right lymphatic duct, with the combined
vessel opening into the right subclavian vein. After performing 529
human dissections, Kinnaert856 found that the thoracic duct terminated
on the internal jugular vein in 36% of the cases, the subclavian vein
Fig. 8.6. Main trunks of the human lymphatic system (redrawn from Tortora853).
Fig. 8.7. Lymphatic drainage regions.
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 217
in 17% of the cases, the jugulo-subclavian junction in 34% of the
cases, both veins 8% of the time, and the transverse cervical vein in
2% of the cases where the thoracic duct terminated on the left. In
21% of the cases, the terminal openings were multiple; in the rest
of the cases, the single thoracic duct terminus diameter ranged from
2-5 mm.856
Various lymphatic organs are located along the length of the
lymphatic system (Fig. 8.8). A major function of these organs is the
production of lymphocytes which are added to the lymph passing
through the vessels. Lymphatic tissue is a loose-structured material
consisting of a spongelike stroma and free cells in the meshes of the
stroma, and is part of the reticuloendothelial system (RES). Phagocytic
cells in the sinuses serve as filters that scavenge particles from the
lymph and destroy them. Such particles include red blood cells,
pathogenic bacteria, and larger dust particles imported by the
respiratory tract and collected by macrophage cells of the bronchial
nodes. Lymphborne nanorobots can avoid these traps (Chapter 15);
the Reynolds number of lymph flow3303 is typically only ~0.0025.
The most numerous of the lymphatic organs is the lymph node,
designed as a bacterial/particulate filter with channels, sinuses, valves,
and fluid entering via 6-10 afferent lymph vessels (Fig. 8.9). Lymph
nodes vary enormously in their size and structure, probably averaging ~4 mm in diameter but occasionally reaching 30-40 mm.857 A
normal young adult body contains ~450 lymph nodes distributed
as follows: ~30 nodes in the arm and superficial thoraco-abdominal
wall down to the umbilicus; ~20 nodes in the legs and superficial
buttocks, infraumbilical abdominal wall and perineum; 60-70 nodes
in the head and neck; ~100 nodes in the thorax, including deep
walls and contents; and ~230 nodes in the abdomen and pelvis,
including deep walls and contents.854
There is also the 10 cm3 of lymphoid tissue in the bilobate thymus
gland, and additional lymphoid tissue in the 80-300 cm3 spleen.854
(The spleen slowly enlarges during alimentary digestion and varies
in size with the content of blood and state of nutrition, being large
in well-fed patients and small in starved patients.) About 10% of
the population has accessory spleens; these ~1 cm3 spleniculi may
be numerous and widely scattered in the abdomen.854 Other lymphoid
tissues include the lymph nodules or the lymph follicles in the
intestines (Section 8.2.3), the subepithelial lymphoid aggregates
including the palatine, lingual, and nasopharyngeal (e.g., adenoids,
tonsils), and the lymphoid tissue in the submucosa of the appendix
and in the bone marrow.
What, exactly, is lymph? Lymph is essentially an alkaline
ultrafiltrate of the blood plasma formed by continual seepage of
fluid constituents of the blood across the capillary walls and into
the surrounding interstitial spaces. The lymph fluid has much the
same composition as the interstitial fluid. Like blood, lymph consists
of a plasmatic part and a corpuscular part (Table 8.6). Lymph contains
almost no platelets but has about one-third the fibrinogen and five
times the prothrombin as in blood serum, hence will thrombose
spontaneously forming a yellowish clot. Lymph has 0.02-0.10% as
many red cells as arterial blood, but most have passed near cells and
become thoroughly deoxygenated, especially given the ~1 day transit
time through the lymphatic system for cells. There is still some
dissolved oxygen in the lymph water, however, roughly the same
concentration as in blood plasma (see Appendix B). Glucose may
be present in lymph at slightly higher concentration than in blood
serum, so lymphoresident nanorobots have access to plenty of
chemical fuel energy (Section 6.3.4). Lymph is slightly less viscous3304
than blood plasma, with specific gravity 0.016-1.023.2223
In a fasting patient, the lymph coming from the intestine is a
clear, transparent fluid. After a meal containing fat has been ingested,
the intestinal lymph becomes white or milky. This is termed chyle—
chyle is just lymph containing a surge (5-15% by volume) of
emulsified fat which is transported in the form of chylomicrons
measuring 0.5-0.75 microns in diameter.749 In ~65% of all patients,
the intestinal trunk (which drains lymph from the stomach, intestines,
Fig. 8.8. Main organs of the human lymphatic system (redrawn from
Tortora853).
Fig. 8.9. Details of a lymph node (redrawn from Haagensen857).
218 Nanomedicine • Volume I
pancreas, spleen, and visceral surface of the liver) empties separately
into the thoracic duct immediately above the junction of the two
lumbar trunks, and so the thoracic duct widens to a diameter of
8-13 mm, forming a cisterna chyli.857,874 In the other ~35% of cases,
the intestinal trunk joins the left lumbar trunk and there is no cisterna
chyli (Fig. 8.10), a navigationally distinctive characteristic.
The chemical composition of lymph plasma varies significantly
at different locations in the lymphatic system, reflecting changes in
source of drainage and variations in capillary permeabilities. This
provides another ready source of useful navigational information
for lymphborne medical nanorobots (Section 8.4.3). For example,
thoracic lymph is rich in histaminase originating in the kidneys and
gut, while cervical duct lymph contains only very low concentrations
of histaminase, as in blood plasma.848 In humans, fibrinogen is 4.1
mg/cm3 in blood plasma, 1.1 mg/cm3 in thoracic duct lymph; in
dogs, prothrombin concentration expressed as a percentage of
serum concentration was measured experimentally as 93.2% in
hepatic lymph, 51.2% in thoracic lymph, and 7.6% in leg lymph.848
The enzyme tributyrinase has high concentration in the intestinal
lymph and significantly lower concentrations elsewhere.847 Insulin
is more plentiful in pancreatic lymph.847
Cervical, leg, renal, and right duct lymph has 33%-50% of the
protein concentration of blood plasma, while intestinal and thoracic
duct lymph contains ~67% as much protein as the blood plasma.860
Protein is generally lowest in the capillary lymph, increasing in several
steps with travel upstream toward the main trunks. Hepatic lymph
has the highest protein content (about equal to blood plasma), as
would be expected in view of the high permeability of the capillaries of
the liver sinusoids.847,860 Central (trunk) lymph generally differs
from blood plasma in having high concentrations of sodium,
cholesterol, and tributyrinase, and significantly lower concentrations
of total protein, albumen α-2 fraction, potassium, nitrogen, aldolase,
pyruvic transaminases, choline esterase, amylase, and diastase.847
The cellular composition of lymph also changes dramatically with
lymphatic location. Most of the prenodal duct lymph contains
~1 x 106 cells/cm3
, except for hepatic lymph which has 4-6 x 106
cells/cm3
. The majority of these cells are red cells, but a small
proportion, perhaps 10-20%, are nucleated cells. Such cells
include ~85% lymphocytes, ~13% monocytes and macrophages, and
~2% neutrophilic granulocytes. The postnodal duct lymph has
~12 times more nucleated cells than the peripheral lymph, perhaps ~3
x 106 nucleated cells/cm3
. The central lymph has 8-11 x 106 nucleated
cells/cm3
.
847
How fast does lymph move? Of the 20 liters/day of plasma
water that leaves the blood circulation through ultrafiltration, 18
liters/day are reabsorbed862 by passing back out of the lymphatic
capillaries and into the venous capillary loops; the remaining 2
liters/day returns to the circulation as lymph that passes through
the entire lymphatic system. In other words, relatively little lymph
reaches the collecting ducts compared with the total amount entering
the lymphatic capillaries;850 much more lymph is formed in the
periphery than ever reaches the main lymph ducts.849 Basal lymph
flow rates are ~2 liters/day,847,848 rising to a 6-12 liter/day rate during
heavy exercise. 848 Summing the vessel crossing times (~length/velocity
from Table 8.5), it takes ~24 hours for a node-inert particle entering a
lymphatic capillary to drift to the final terminus of the thoracic
duct and rejoin the venous flow.
What moves the lymph? Valves are essential to the function of
the lymph vascular system, which has no pump comparable to the
heart. In the collecting ducts, one-way valves are spaced roughly
2-3 mm apart857 and can oppose retrograde pressures of up to 20
mmHg.855 Lymph flow in the extremities depends largely on the
massaging effect of movement of the surrounding tissues that
results from muscle contraction. Such movements can be produced
indirectly by the motion of nearby arterioles, or by the contraction
of the skeletal muscles, or by movement of the organs (e.g., motion
of the arms or legs, peristalsis of the intestine, or breathing of the
lung). Arterial pulsations contribute 1.5-2.2 mmHg pressure variation
to the lymphatic ducts between systole and diastole.848 Larger
collecting lymphatics are innervated, so movement can also be
induced by contractions of smooth muscles in the lymphatic vessel
Table 8.6. Chemical Compostion of Human Thoracic
Lymph585,847,848
Concentration
Component of Lymph (gm/cm3
)
Albumin 1.6-4.2 x 10-2
Bilirubin 5.0-8.0 x 10-6
Calcium 7.7 x 10-5
Chloride 3.4 x 10-3
Cholesterol 7.5 x 10-4
Creatinine 0.8-3.0 x 10-5
Fibrinogen 0.16-1.1 x 10-3
Globulin 1.2-2.6 x 10-2
Glucose 0.95-1.4 x 10-3
Iron 9.4 x 10-7
Nitrogen, non-protein 2.3 x 10-4
Phosphorus, inorganic 3.9 x 10-5
Potassium 1.8 x 10-4
Protein, total 2.8-5.1 x 10-2
Prothrombin 5.1 x 10-4
Sodium 2.9 x 10-3
Uric acid 3.3-5.0 x 10-5
Water 8.6 x 10-1
Concentration
Component of Lymph (cells/cm3)
Erythrocytes (red cells)
-Normal, mean 1-5 x 106
-Normal, max 7 x 107
-Leukemic 1.5 x 109
Lymphocytes 0.19-2.0 x 107
Neutrophilic granulocytes 0.2-4.0 x 105
Platelets ~ 0
Fig. 8.10. Two patterns for the junction of the lumbar lymphatic
trunks (redrawn from Haagensen857).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 219
wall.848 The contractile activity seems to depend on the volume of
lymph produced. If this is small, the vessel walls are quiescent, but
slight distension initiates rhythmic contractions at ~0.1-0.2
Hz838,848,863 and can raise the lymphatic pressure by up to ~5
mmHg.855 By comparison, the mean interstitial hydrostatic pressure is ~1.4 mmHg and the mean intralymphatic pressure is ~0.9
mmHg.526,847,860
The minimum topological map required to reliably navigate the
entire ~3500 kilometers of human lymphatic vasculature should be
roughly comparable to that required for a comprehensive blood capillary map, or ~1 terabit (Section 8.2.1.2).
8.2.2 Navigational Bronchography
Medical nanorobots may access the human body via the respiratory
system. The airway begins at the mouth and nose, extends through
the pharynx, larynx, the trachea and bronchial branchings, and ends
at the alveoli. The conducting zone from the top of the trachea to
the beginning of the respiratory bronchioles contains no alveoli, so
gas exchange with the blood does not occur there. Gas exchange
occurs only in the respiratory zone, which extends from the respiratory
bronchioles down to the alveolar sacs.
Weibel864 provided the first quantitative measurements of the
length, diameter, and area of successive segments of the human airway.
Each branch gives rise to two narrower daughter branches which
may vary considerably in length. However, the summary in Table
8.7 assumes mean values of length and diameter. Generations 0-16
are the conducting airways, while generations 17-23 constitute the
respiratory airways which have alveoli on their walls. Generation
23 terminates in alveoli.
The respiratory airflow begins in the mouth and nose. In the
nose are two nasal cavities (totalling ~160 cm2 in area,)863 one of
which is illustrated in Figure 8.11. The nasal cavities are divided by
a partition called the nasal septum, from which diverge three winglike
projections called the conchae. The endings of the olfactory nerve
lie in the mucosa in the cilia-free region near the ~1 cm2 olfactory
bulb above the superior concha. The nasal passages are flanked by
four sinuses which may swell up during infection or inflammation,
closing off the air passages and necessitating breathing through the
mouth. Lacrimal ducts drain tears and other secretions from the
eyes into the nose via the nasolacrimal duct, requiring noseblowing
after crying. The 1 mm human vomeronasal organ, located near
the base of the nasal septum in adults,1971 transduces pheromonal
signals,1972 although apparently this organ is not present, is inactive, or
is very insensitive in some people.
Air passing through the nasal cavities is warmed to within 1 K of
body temperature by an extensive capillary vasculature, and is
humidified by nasal mucous glands (e.g., goblet cells which secrete
mucoid fluid) to within ~1% of full saturation, before the air enters
the pharynx. Coarse particles are removed from incoming air by
nose hairs. Smaller particles are removed by turbulent precipitation,
wherein obstacles in the nasal passages force the airflow to execute
many sharp turns which the particles are too heavy to negotiate.
The particles hit the nasal mucous membrane and become embedded
in the mucus. The nasal turbulence mechanism is so effective that
Table 8.7. Approximate Quantification of the Human Bronchial System864
Branch Branch Cumul. X-Section Cumul.
Diameter Length Length Area Volume Volume Air Speed Reynolds
Pulmonary Branch Generation Number (mm) (mm) (mm) (cm2) (cm3) (cm3) (cm/sec) Number
Trachea 0 1 18 120.0 120 2.6 31 31 393 4350
Main bronchus 1 2 12.2 47.6 167 2.3 11 42 427 3210
Lobar bronchus 2 4 8.3 19.0 186 2.2 4 46 462 2390
3 8 5.6 7.6 194 2.0 2 47 507 1720
Segmental bronchus 4 16 4.5 12.7 206 2.6 3 51 392 1110
5 32 3.5 10.7 217 3.1 3 54 325 690
Bronchi w/cartilage 6 64 2.8 9.0 226 4.0 4 57 254 434
in wall 7 128 2.3 7.6 234 5.1 4 61 188 277
8 256 1.86 6.4 240 7.0 4 66 144 164
9 512 1.54 5.4 246 9.6 5 71 105 99
10 1020 1.30 4.6 250 13 6 77 73.6 60
Terminal bronchus 11 2050 1.09 3.9 254 19 7 85 52.3 34
12 4100 0.95 3.3 257 29 10 95 34.4 20
Bronchioles w/muscle 13 8190 0.82 2.7 260 44 12 106 23.1 11
in wall 14 16,400 0.74 2.3 262 70 16 123 14.1 6.5
15 32,800 0.66 2.0 264 113 22 145 8.92 3.6
Terminal bronchiole 16 65,500 0.60 1.65 266 180 30 175 5.40 2.0
Respiratory bronchiole 17 131 x 103 0.54 1.41 267 300 42 217 3.33 1.1
Respiratory bronchiole 18 262 x 103 0.50 1.17 269 534 61 278 1.94 0.57
Respiratory bronchiole 19 524 x 103 0.47 0.99 270 944 93 370 1.10 0.31
Alveolar duct 20 1.05 x 106 0.45 0.83 271 1600 139 510 0.60 0.17
Alveolar duct 21 2.10 x 106 0.43 0.70 271 3200 224 734 0.32 0.08
Alveolar duct 22 4.19 x 106 0.41 0.59 272 5900 350 1085 0.18 0.04
Alveolar sac 23 8.39 x 106 0.41 0.50 273 12,000 591 1675 0.09 --
Alveoli, 21 per duct -- 300 x106 0.28 0.23 273 -- 3200 4800 -- --
average of five normal human lungs; includes both lungs; air speed and Reynolds number at 1 liter/sec flow.
220 Nanomedicine • Volume I
almost no nasally-inhaled particles larger than 2-5 microns reach
the lower airway.
Most of the surfaces of the nasal airway are covered by a layer of
ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium cells. Each epithelial
surface cell has 25-100 cilia that beat forcefully and continually
toward the pharynx at ~10 Hz.3556,3557 Respiratory cilia are ~0.2
microns in diameter and ~2-5 microns long (having a ~31 nm apical
glycocalyx),3587 with a mean separation between cilia of ~2-5 microns.
The film of particle-carrying nasal mucus 200 microns thick 3167
is moved toward the pharynx by the cilia at a speed of ~1-3 cm/
min,863,3167 where it is then swallowed down the esophagus. Mucus
velocity increases with luminal depth. In unciliated areas such as
the front of the nose, where temperatures fall below levels the cilia
can tolerate, the mucous layer creeps along the surface solely through
traction from neighboring ciliated areas. Swallowed mucus volume
totals ~0.1 cm3
/min. The absolute viscosity of normal mucus is
typically ~1 kg/m-sec, rising as high as ~500 kg/m-sec in the thick
sputum of cystic fibrosis patients.1081 Mucus rheology and
mucociliary clearance mechanisms of the respiratory tract have been
widely studied,3168 along with the energy dissipation per cilium in the
periciliary fluid.3170 Airflow contributes little to mucus transport
during normal breathing ,3168 except in patients with bronchial hypersecretions,3167 although high-frequency ventilation and coughing may
make significant contributions.3167-3169
During inspiration, air passes through the nose or mouth into
the pharynx (throat). The posterior wall of the pharynx rests against
the cervical vertebrae; the lateral wall has openings communicating
with the middle ear (auditory or eustachian tube). The pharynx
branches into two tubes—the esophagus (through which food passes
to the stomach; Section 8.2.3) and the larynx (part of the airways).
The larynx houses the vocal cords, two strong bands of elastic tissue
(covered by stratified scalelike epithelium) stretched horizontally
across its lumen. The flow of air past the vocal cords causes them to
vibrate, producing sounds. The ventricular folds or false vocal cords
(in mid-glottis) point downward. When closed by the action of
sphincter muscles, the folds form an exit valve that permits the
building up of abdominal pressure as in straining at stool or in
expulsion of the fetus. Coughing involves releasing the air explosively
through the folds.
After passing the larynx, air enters the trachea, a cylindrical tube
with 16-20 circumferential cartilaginous rings shaped like horseshoes
and embedded in an external fibroelastic membrane (Fig. 8.12).
The trachea branches into two main bronchi, one of which enters
each lung. The right bronchus is shorter, wider, and more nearly
vertical in direction than the left bronchus; both (and subsequent
branchings) are supported by complete rings of cartilage to prevent
collapse under high levels of suction. There are more than 20
generations of branchings in the lungs, each resulting in narrower,
shorter, and more numerous tubes (Table 8.7). When the bronchi
become smaller than ~1 mm in diameter, they lose their cartilage,
and become bronchioles.
The lungs themselves are cone-shaped organs which lie in the
pleural cavities of the thorax. The base of each lung contacts with
the upper surface of the diaphragm, extending to the level of the
7th rib anteriorly and the 11th rib posteriorly. The right and left
pleural cavities are formed by two serous sacs into which the lungs
are invaginated. Two layers of pleura are separated by a thin layer of
fluid from ~20-80 microns thick. Pleural fluid is formed on the
parietal pleural surface at a rate of 7-11 cm3
/hr, with up to 20-25
cm3 normally present in the pleural space;2180,3305 glucose is present
at serum levels (Appendix B) and there are topographic differences
in pleural pressure.3402 The right lung, larger in size than the left, is
divided into three lobes; the left lung has only two lobes (Fig. 8.12),
presumably to make room for the heart. The interlobar surfaces are
covered with visceral pleura where the lobes contact one
another and are lubricated with the same thin mucoid pleural fluid
that lubricates the outer surface of the lungs. The lobes slide against
each other in the same way that the entire lungs slide within the
thoracic cavity. The diaphragm is the principle respiratory muscle.
Contraction of the diaphragm elongates the lungs, forcing them to
inflate. Other muscles elevate the anterior thoracic wall or compress
the abdomen, raising the ribs from an inferiorly slanting position to
a horizontal position that increases the anteroposterior diameter of
the chest.
Returning to the airflow, bronchiole walls are composed of
smooth muscle and connective tissue. This smooth muscle normally
Fig. 8.11. Sagittal section through mouth, nasal cavity, pharynx and
larynx (redrawn from Millard, King, and Showers750).
Fig. 8.12. Lung lobes and the bronchial tree (crude schematic,
redrawn from Guyton863).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 221
remains relaxed so that the bronchioles stay open, although particles of
irritating substances entering these passageways can cause bronchiolar
spasms (as in patients with asthma). The bronchioles branch several
times. The last bronchiolar branch that still has a complete
muscular coat is the terminal bronchiole. This too branches into
several respiratory bronchioles with sparse smooth muscle. These
bronchioles are the entryways into the respiratory lobules, the final
air spaces of the lungs (Fig. 8.13). The walls of all parts of the respiratory lobules form the respiratory membrane which totals ~70 m2
in total surface area in both lungs combined.361,863 The membrane is
so thin (1 micron) that oxygen and carbon dioxide can diffuse
freely between the air inside the lobule and the blood in the capillary
surrounding the lobule.
As in the nasal passages, the bronchial tree from the lower pharynx
down to the end of the respiratory bronchioles is lined with ciliated
columnar epithelial cells. These cilia also wave constantly toward
the pharynx, moving secreted mucus at ~1.4 cm/min which replaces
the entire mucoid coating once every ~20 minutes. A second protective
mechanism is provided by mobile phagocytes present in the airways
and in the alveoli, that engulf inhaled particles and bacteria
(100/cm2 in a healthy person360) and thus prevent this foreign
matter from gaining access to other lung cells or from entering the
blood by conveying this matter into the lymph system. Ciliary
activity may be inhibited for several hours by smoking a single
cigarette. Phagocytes are also injured by cigarette smoke, air pollution,
and other noxious agents. Below the respiratory bronchioles, the
ciliated columnar epithelium gives way to a nonciliated cuboidal
epithelium.
Alveoli first begin to appear in the respiratory bronchioles, attached
to the walls, and their frequency increases in the alveolar ducts until
the airways end in grapelike clusters of alveoli (Fig. 8.13). The
alveoli are tiny hollow sacs 100-300 microns in diameter that open
onto the lumina of the airways (Fig. 8.14). Typically the air in
two alveoli is separated by a single wall. The moist air-facing
surfaces of the alveolar wall are lined by a continuous layer, one
cell thick, of squamous type I epithelial cells (Fig. 8.15, enlargement of box in Figure 8.14). The alveolar surface contains smaller
numbers of thicker specialized type II epithelial cells that secrete a
detergent-like substance, or surfactant (a complex of protein with
dipalmityl lecithin) in a fluid layer ~70 nm thick, which physically
stabilizes alveoli of different sizes during inflation and deflation. (See
also Section 9.2.3.)
The alveolar walls also contain capillaries, the endothelial linings of
which are separated from the alveolar epithelial lining only by a
basement membrane and a very thin interstitial space containing
interstitial fluid and a loose meshwork of connective tissue (Fig.
8.15). In places, the interstitium is absent and the alveolar epithelium
fuses with the capillary endothelium, with total thickness 1 micron.
In some of the alveolar walls there are pores that permit the flow of
air between alveoli, an important route when the airway leading to
an alveolus is occluded by disease.
Fig. 8.13. Expanded view of the respiratory lobules (redrawn from
Vander, Sherman, and Luciano866).
Fig. 8.14. Expanded view of the alveolus (redrawn from Greep and
Weiss867).
Fig. 8.15. Expanded view of the alveolar wall (redrawn from Vander,
Sherman, and Luciano866).
222 Nanomedicine • Volume I
At rest, ~4 liters/min of air enter and leave the alveoli, while 5.4
liters/min of blood, the entire cardiac output, flows through pulmonary capillaries which total ~2400 kilometers in length and ~150
cm3 in volume. During heavy exercise, the air flow to the alveoli
can increase to 120-160 liters/min and the blood flow to 25-30
liters/min.866 The volume of air taken in with each breath (resting
tidal volume) is ~0.4 liter/breath at a respiration rate of 18/min
(12-15/min during sleep). Volume flow may rise to ~3.2 liters/breath
at a respiration rate of up to 62/min during the most strenous
exercise.780 The two human lungs hold a combined ~6 liters of gas,
of which ~3.7 liters is the maximum inspirational capacity leaving
~2.3 liters as residual capacity or dead space.
Blood pressure in the pulmonary artery is only 15-30 mmHg
systolic and 4-12 mmHg diastolic, compared to 100-150 mmHg
systolic and 60-100 mmHg diastolic in the aorta.361This low-pressure
system allows pulmonary capillaries to be quite flexible and
thin-walled—they distend if higher blood pressures are applied to
the pulmonary artery. Pulmonary blood vessels are richly supplied
with nerve fibers but are largely free from neural and chemical
control—although they do respond to hypoxia and to pharmacological
doses of catecholamines, histamine and serotonin.361
A navigational map of the airways can be surprisingly compact.
Only log2(300 x 106
) ~ 28 bits are needed to uniquely name each
alveolus, requiring 8.4 x 109 bits to store all 300 million addresses.
A complete bifurcation map of the airways down to the last generation
of respiratory bronchioles (e.g., a lobule map for both lungs) can be
stored in just ~107 bits. If numerous positions within each alveolus
must be specified, for example during a scan seeking pre-cancerous
epithelial cells, the required map could be much larger. However,
C. Phoenix notes that if nanorobots are given individual instructions
to scan a certain set of cells for cancer, a contiguous (nonrandom)
tissue volume could be searched, specified by a small number of
partial addresses. For instance, if 107 nanorobots were tasked to
scan 30 (unnamed) alveoli each, within the contiguous volume, then
each nanorobot must store one ~23 bit hardcoded kernel address
plus one ~5 bit alveolus extension address (total 28 bits/alveolus)
and one 30-bit cell address for each cancerous cell discovered, a
modest memory requirement. On the other hand, general surveyor
nanorobots lacking individualized instructions can keep track of
the forks they pass and the branches they take as they enter the
lungs, assembling the final address (of any cancer cell they ultimately
discover) as they go. Upon reaching the terminus of the bronchial
system and encountering another nanorobot already at work, the
newcomer moves on to another location, keeping track of its current
address (~28 bits). Once a cancer is detected, treatment nanorobots
can follow the surveyor’s address to return to the specific cancer cell
without requiring a comprehensive map of the rest of the lung. Thus
a treatment protocol can be executed without any overall map of
the lung, although the assignment of individual search territories
may prove more efficient, and multiple connectivities within the
bifurcation tree may demand storage of additional bits or require
post-survey data compression.
8.2.3 Navigational Alimentography
Medical nanorobots may also access the human body via the
alimentary canal—a ~6 meter long musculomembranous digestive
tube which begins at the mouth and ends at the anus. With its
accessory glands and organs, the alimentary system controls the intake,
mastication, digestion, absorption and elimination of foods.
An approximate quantification of the gastrointestinal system is
given in Table 8.8. (Passage times are for normal digestion and exclude
pathological conditions such as constipation or diarrhea.) The general
Table 8.8. Approximate Quantification of the Human Alimentary System750,853,863,870,874,2122
External Internal Luminal Contents Velocity
Alimentary Diameter or Volume Cylinder Passage of Contents
System Component Length (cm) Width (cm) (cm3
) (cm2
) Time (cm/sec)
Mouth & Pharynx 8 2-5 ~ 50 ~ 80 1-10 sec 1-8
Esophagus 25 1.3-2.5 ~ 100 ~ 200 5-20 sec 3-5
Stomach 12 8 230-1000 ~ 600 2-6 hrs ~ 0.001
Pyloric sphincter 0.3 1.3-2.0
Small Intestine 400 3-6 1100 ~ 3500 3-5 hrs 0.03
Duodenum 25 3.8-6.0
Jejunum 160 3.2-3.8
Ileum 215 2.5-3.2
Large Intestine ~ 150 5.0-7.5 300 ~ 2000 10-20 hrs 0.004-0.008
Cecum 6 7.5
Appendix 8-9 ~ 0.8 0.07-0.60
Ascending colon 13-20 ~ 7
Transverse colon 50 ~ 6.5
Descending colon 23-30 ~ 6
Sigmoid colon 41 ~ 5
Rectum 16-20 2.5-3.8 40 ~ 100 ~ 1 hr 0.006
Rectal canal 13-16 3.8
Anal canal 3-4 2.5
Total, Average, or Range: ~ 600 ~ 3.5 1800-2600 ~ 6500 16-32 hrs ~ 0.01
estimated for 70 kg adult male.
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 223
plan as shown in Figure 8.16 is topologically very simple. The
alimentary canal is formed by the mouth, pharynx, esophagus,
stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and rectum. Associated
with the canal are accessory structures and glands including the
salivary glands, liver, gallbladder and pancreas. The tube itself has
four layers in radial aspect. Starting at the luminal surface these
include the mucosal (superficial epithelium and cells secreting
mucus and digestive juices), submucosal (connective tissue with
blood and lymphatic vessels), muscular (smooth muscle in circular
and longitudinal layers) and serous (parietal and visceral peritoneum)
layers. The entire tract, glands, and muscle are innervated from the
involuntary or autonomic system and are also influenced by hormones,
some from the tract itself and some secreted by glands elsewhere in
the body.
It is instructive to imagine the “view” from a medical nanorobot
as the nanodevice navigates the entire length of the alimentary system.
The journey begins in the mouth (the sphincter oris) where food
(typical viscosity 0.01-100 kg/m-sec3309-3313) is chewed and mixed
with saliva secreted by one of the three pairs of major salivary glands
(Fig. 8.17). (There are also the minor salivaries consisting of the
labial, buccal, molar, lingual, and palatine glands ).935 After consulting
its map, the nanorobot first explores a duct (~1 mm wide, ~25 mm
long) in the anteroinferior dental arch leading into the walnut-sized
submaxillary salivary gland situated mostly under the lower jawbone.
The gland is organized as several thousand separate small secretory
units called acini. Each acinus with its microduct forms a single
parenchymal unit called a salivon.935 The lumens of salivons flow
together to form progressively larger ducts (all surrounded by
contractile myoepithelial cells and a basal lamina), finally reaching
the main salivary duct that empties into the mouth. Passing under
the tongue, our mobile nanodevice traverses multiple ducts (~0.5
mm wide, ~5 mm long) leading from the sublingual, the smallest
gland located in the floor of the mouth. After climbing up to the
soft palate in the roof of the mouth, the nanorobot reaches a pair of
ducts (~1 mm wide, 15-20 mm long) leading from the parotid
glands—the largest of the three glands, lying anteroinferior to each
ear.
The six major salivary glands together typically produce 500-1500
cm3
/day of saliva in response to mechanical, thermal, and chemical
stimuli applied to the mucous membrane of the mouth, or as the
result of psychological or olfactory stimuli.749,751,1975 Unstimulated
flow is 10-50 cm3
/hr during waking hours and 1-2 cm3
/hr during
sleep,749,873 but may rise as high as 290 cm3
/hr during eating.585
Salivary fluid specific gravity is 1.01-1.02, mean viscosity is ~ 4 x 10-3
kg/m-sec but up to 7.4 x 10-3 kg/m-sec in bulimic patients,3306 and
pH averages 6.8 (range 5.6-7.6).585,751 Plenty of chemical energy
(Section 6.3.4) is available to power a nanorobot exploring these
ducts—including 1.96 (1.13-2.81) x 10-4 gm/cm3 of glucose, 7.5
(2.5-9.0) x 10-5 gm/cm3 of cholesterol, and 2-4 x 10-3 gm/cm3 of
protein for stimulated secretions,585,749 or 1 x 10-3 gm/cm3 of glucose
and 8 x 10-3 gm/cm3 of cholesterol for unstimulated secretions.943
Saliva is 99.4% (99.1%-99.6%) water,585 but duct secretions vary
enough in composition along the length of each duct and between
glands to be useful in crude chemonavigation (Section 8.4.3). For
example, the submaxillary glands secrete 2.7 (0.8-6.0) x 10-3 gm/
cm3 of mucopolysaccharide (mucin) derived from mucous cells
within the glands, plus a small amount of the important digestive
enzyme ptyalin (salivary amylase) from serous cells. By comparison,
the parotid glands are purely serous glands that secrete no mucin,
while the sublingual glands secrete mostly mucus.585,863 The salivary
microbial population is ~ 106
/cm3
.
360
After food has been chewed, moistened, and reduced to a
semi-liquid state, the tongue rolls it into a 1-10 cm3 bolus3312 and
pushes it backward into the pharynx (Fig. 8.11). During the act of
deglutition (swallowing), the uvula is pushed backward against the
posterior pharyngeal wall, closing the nasal passages; the larynx
elevates and the epiglottis folds back, forming a protective ledge
Fig. 8.16. Overview of the alimentary system from mouth to rectum
(redrawn from Janowitz871).
Fig. 8.17. Midplane section of a terminal portion of the submaxillary
salivary gland (myoepithelium omitted; redrawn from Guyton863).
224 Nanomedicine • Volume I
that covers the windpipe. The esophagus opens to receive the food,
and contracting muscular waves convey the bolus to the stomach.
These waves are strong enough to oppose at least several g’s of negative
vertical acceleration; esophageal manometry shows normal contractions
of up to ~190 mmHg in the distal esophagus.2122 With each swallow,
2-5 cm3
 of air are ingested.2180
Like the mouth and pharynx, the esophagus is lined with
mucus-coated stratified squamous epithelium which is part of the
mucous membrane. Figure 8.18 illustrates a cross-section of the
esophagus, showing a number of longitudinal pleats to allow radial
stretching. Note that when no food is present, the tube is almost
completely squeezed shut. The tube readily distends to a width of
1-2 cm to permit the passage of a bolus of food or drink. The
movement of food from the bottom of the esophagus into the stomach
is controlled by the opening and closing of a muscular ring called
the lower esophageal or cardiac sphincter. At the approach of the
bolus, the cardiac sphincter relaxes, the opening widens, and the
food is shot into the stomach. Normal sphincter pressure is 10-50
mmHg.2122,2180
The stomach is an irregularly pear-shaped bag located at the level
of the lowermost ribs with its upper end just below the heart. It has
a central portion (the body), a balloonlike portion to the left (the
fundus), and a constricted portion to the lower right (the pylorus,
or lower quarter of the organ). The upper part of the stomach is
usually puffed out a bit with gas, even when the stomach is empty,
so it protrudes slightly above the cardiac sphincter. However, when
the stomach is filled with food in a man standing erect, the organ
assumes an almost vertical position with a tubular shape.
When greatly stretched, the stomach of a normal male can store
as much as 1000 cm3 of food and fluid, up to 1500 cm3 for very
large people but as little as ~60 cm3 in newborns;863,870 however,
500 cm3 usually gives a person a sense of fullness.863 The inner wall
of the empty stomach has longitudinal expansion pleats called
rugae. As the stomach fills with food, the rugae flatten out and
disappear, leaving a ~600 cm2 smooth mucous membrane surface
when the organ is full.
The uppermost epithelial layer of the stomach lining is the mucosa,
several millimeters thick (Fig. 8.19). Almost all of the epithelial cells
that line the surface are simple columnar mucous cells that secrete
mucus. The gastric mucus is especially viscous, ~50-100 microns
thick,3165 and is highly resistant to both the digestive juices and the
acid secreted by the stomach itself. Absorption through the almost
impermeable stomach wall is slight, although the stomach does absorb small amounts of water, electrolytes, certain drugs such as aspirin, and alcohol.
The mucosa contains the secreting cells of the stomach, arranged
in small tubular units to form the gastric glands. Within these glands,
the chief or zymogenic cells are simple columnar cells forming a
continuous lining for the tubule, and secrete important
protein-digesting enzymes such as pepsin and rennin (chymosin),
and lipid-digesting enzymes such as lipase. The parietal cells are
scattered along the tubule and secrete ~0.5% hydrochloric acid
solution.749 Both the movements of the stomach and the flow of
gastric juice may be stimulated by the nerve plexuses and by hormones
such as gastrin and histamine.751
Each day ~35 million gastric glands secrete 1000-3000 cm3 of
gastric juice;1975 a residuum of 50 cm3 is always present in the stomach,
even after lengthy fasting.749 Secretion rates in young adults average 77
cm3
/hr (male) and 70 cm3
/hr (female) while fasting, 54 cm3
/hr
(male) and 38 cm3
/hr (female) while sleeping, and 114 cm3
/hr (male)
and 99 cm3
/hr (female) after eating.585 (The gender distinction is
at least partly due to differences in mean body size.) Gastric juice is
99% water with specific gravity ~1.006 (1.004-1.010) and pH
~2.0.585,751 Glucose content of gastric juice is 0.33-1.19 x 10-3 gm/
cm3
.
585
If the stomach has been empty for some time, it contracts and
produces uncomfortable sensations (hunger pangs). Soon after food
is taken, the pangs cease and gastric peristalsis begins as a ring of
constriction around the middle of the stomach. This ring progresses
toward the pylorus, growing measurably deeper as it moves. These
mixing waves recur at ~3/minute, each taking ~1 minute to travel
from its origin to the pylorus, so there are usually 3-4 moving waves
of contraction simultaneously present on the human stomach. This
kneading of the food can produce a gurgling sound because of the
gas that is usually trapped in the stomach.
The well-churned food mixture, now called chyme, is ejected
through the pyloric valve into the duodenum of the small intestine.
Nervous and hormonal signals (e.g., enterogastrone) arising mainly
from the duodenum, but also partly from the stomach, control the
degree of contraction of the pyloric sphincter and thereby control
the rate at which the chyme is emptied from the stomach into the
duodenum of the small intestine.
About 8-10 cm downstream from the pyloric sphincter, the
cruising nanorobot pauses to investigate a small elevation called
the duodenal papilla. The orifice at the summit of the papilla is
surrounded by muscle fibers which form the sphincter of Oddi,
Fig. 8.18. Cross-section of the esophagus (redrawn from Guyton863).
Fig. 8.19. Layers of the stomach lining (redrawn from Guyton863).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 225
beyond which lies the 6-mm-wide ampulla of Vater and the common
bile duct, a tube ~3 mm wide and ~60 mm in length that carries
various glandular secretions directly into the duodenum. About 10
mm up the ampulla of Vater the pancreatic duct (duct of Wirsung)
veers to the left side of the body and runs ~15 mm to the pancreas,
where it continues on for the length of the organ, another ~90 mm.
In some patients, the narrower accessory pancreatic duct (duct of
Santorini, draining the head of the pancreas) runs ~15 mm from
the pancreas and empties into the duodenum ~25 mm upstream
from the duodenal papilla. Through the ~2 mm wide pancreatic
duct passes ~1000-1500 cm3
/day of pancreatic juice.853,1975 This
juice contains pancreatin, a mixture of the three digestive enzymes
trypsin (which digests protein), lipase (which digests fat), and amylase
(which digests starch). The specific gravity of the fluid is 1.008,
mean viscosity is 1.61 x 10-3 kg/m-sec (up to 5.8 x 10-3 kg/m-sec in
patients with chronic pancreatitis3315), the pH is 7-8, and the glucose
content is 0.85-1.8 x 10-4 gm/cm3
.
585 Juice flows on signal from the
hormone secretin, manufactured by the mucous membrane of the
duodenum which sends its message as soon as partially digested
food enters from the stomach.
Moving ~55 mm up the common bile duct from the ampulla of
Vater, the nanorobot passes through the sphincter of Boyden and
next encounters the cystic duct, a ~2 mm wide tube ~35 mm in
length branching to the right that leads through the spiral valve
directly to the gallbladder. The branch to the left (of the body)
continues as the ~25 mm long common hepatic duct, which then
bifurcates to form the left and right hepatic ducts (~2 mm wide)
leading directly to the liver (Section 8.2.5), each duct up to ~50
mm in length. Some patients also have a few direct connections
between the liver and the cystic duct, called the ducts of Luschka.935
The gallbladder is a 7-10 cm long pear-shaped bag composed of
muscle and membrane lodged in a hollow on the underside of the
right lobe of the liver behind the lower ribs, that serves as the reservoir
for bile that is secreted continuously by the liver. The cystic duct
carries bile both to and from the gallbladder, depending upon
whether the sphincter of Oddi is open or closed. The liver secretes
800-1000 cm3 of bile each day,853 but the bile duct delivers only
~500 cm3
/day of bile to the duodenum.870 The excess is shunted to
the gallbladder, which holds up to ~50 cm3 of tenfold bile concentrate
(more than 90% of the water and salts are reabsorbed from the
excess flow). The gallbladder empties by contraction of the smooth
muscle contained in its walls, when stimulated by the hormone
cholecystokinin, which serves as the signal that bile is needed. This
signal in turn is triggered by the passage of chyme over the duodenal
papilla in the small intestine. Only about 10% of the bile is permanently lost in the feces; 90% is reabsorbed and returned to the liver.
Bile is a bitter yellowish fluid that helps to emulsify and digest
fats to hasten their absorption from the intestines, to activate the
pancreatic enzyme lipase, to stimulate intestinal movements, and to
inhibit fermentation of the bowel contents. The specific gravity of
bile is 0.998-1.062; absolute viscosity ranges from 0.843-2.342 x 10-3
kg/m-sec; and pH averages 7.5 (6.2-8.5) for hepatic bile, 6.0
(5.6-8.0) for gallbladder bile.585 Hepatic bile contains 1.7-5.2 x 10-4
gm/cm3 sugars and 1.2 (0.8-1.7) x 10-3 gm/cm3 cholesterol, while
gallbladder bile contains 8 x 10-4 gm/cm3 sugars and 6.3 (3.5-9.3)
x 10-3 gm/cm3 cholesterol,585 plus 0.3-3% lipids.749 Thus the various
biles are chemonavigationally distinguishable.
The nanorobot resumes its journey down the small intestine.
The small bowel extends from the pylorus of the stomach all the
way to the large intestine and occupies the greater portion of the
abdominal cavity. About 90% of all digestion and absorption
takes place in the small intestine, including up to 6 liters/day of
the 8-10 liters/day of water that flows into it from swallowed saliva,
ingested water, the acid fluid secreted by the stomach, bile and pancreatic juice, as well as fluid secreted by the upper small bowel itself.
Food is passed along by muscular contractions in waves known collectively as peristalsis, with waves progressing arhythmically for distances varying from 10-100 cm in length, and occasionally over the
entire length of the small intestine. Food is also broken up by rhythmic segmentation contractions within the irregular peristaltic motions, which are ringlike contractions of the circular muscle ranging
in frequency from 10-30/minute, with higher rates at the upstream
end of the bowel.
The small intestine is a continuous tube with three well-defined
sections—the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum (Table 8.8). The total
length is commonly reported as ~7 meters, but this measurement is
for tissues taken from cadavers which have lost all muscle tone. In
the living body, the small intestine is only 3-5 meters in length.863
In the duodenum and jejunum the submucosa elevates into a series
of permanent transverse pleats called circular folds, plicae circulares,
or Kerkring’s folds (Fig. 8.20). These ridges do not disappear when
the wall is distended by the passage of food, and may stand up to
~10 mm high in the mucosa. Some folds wrap all the way around
the intestine, while others extend only partly around. Starting a
short distance past the pylorus, the circular folds are numerous and
high in the distal portion of the duodenum and in the proximal
portion of the jejunum, after which they gradually become less
numerous and smaller; by mid-ileum, they fade out completely.
Thus the number and depth of the folds may be used as crude
navigational surface markers of range from the pylorus. The folds
increase the local absorptive area by about threefold and further
enhance absorption by causing the chyme to spiral as it passes
downstream,853 crudely analogous to a spinning bullet passing down
a rifled bore. A nanorobot traversing the folded intestinal surface
must travel at least ~3 times farther than another nanorobot pursuing a
more linear axial course through the luminal (chymous) contents of
the tube.
The duodenum is the first short part of the small intestine,
arranged in a horseshoe shape enclosing the head of the pancreas.
The acidic chyme is neutralized following exposure to the alkaline
pancreatic juices and bile fluid. Hence the pH of the chyme
Fig. 8.20. Layers of the small intestine (redrawn from Guyton863).
226 Nanomedicine • Volume I
increases along the length of the duodenum, a fact which may be
useful for chemonavigation (Section 8.4.3). The duodenal glands
(Brunner’s glands) are found only in the duodenum. They are tortuous
and branching; their mucus-containing secretion has a pH of 5.8-7.6,
a specific gravity of 1.01, and a highly variable cholesterol concentration of 3.61 (0-31.5) x 10-4 gm/cm3
.
585 Total unstimulated secretory
volume is ~30 cm3
/hr, rising to 181 cm3
/hr (male) and 126 cm3
/hr
(female) with secretin stimulation.585
In the jejunum, fats, starches, and proteins are broken down to
their smallest components (or small peptides) and are absorbed by
the lining cells of the bowel. Of particular interest, absorption of
sugars takes place chiefly in the upstream portion of the small intestine,
specifically in the duodenum and upper jejunum. Hence the concentration of glucose in the chyme peaks and then sharply declines in
the jejunum because starches of all molecular sizes are enzymatically
reduced to the simplest sugars there, prior to absorption, although
the disaccharides are not as readily absorbed. Cholesterol is also
absorbed mainly in the jejunum.
In the ileum, water is absorbed (~0.07-0.40 cm3
/sec) along with
calcium, other minerals, and vitamins (especially vitamin B12). Bile
is recaptured and returned to the liver via the hepatic portal vein
and the lymphatic thoracic duct systems. Fat is also absorbed more
rapidly in the ileum than in the duodenum or jejunum. These spatially
differential absorptive properties of the small intestine produce
numerous luminal chemical gradients that may be useful for both
axial and radial chemonavigation by nanorobots traveling with the
chyme flow.
Four additional somatographic features will be encountered by
nanorobots crawling across the surface of the small intestine. First,
lymphoid tissue is present in the form of nodules or follicles
throughout the luminal wall. These may appear as solitary nodules
that may extend into the submucosa all over the intestine, averaging
0.4-2 mm in diameter, up to 3-5 nodules/cm2 of mucous membrane,
~2400-4500 per patient.848 The nodules become larger and more
numerous as the nanorobot travels downstream. Aggregated nodules
are found chiefly in the lower ileum, penetrating the mucosa,
always located on the side of the intestinal wall opposite to the line
of attachment of the mesentery. These oval-shaped aggregates, called
Peyer’s patches, are slightly elevated areas 12-38 mm in length and
8-25 mm wide, oriented with the long axis pointing downstream.874
Each patch is composed of 8-60 nodules in varying degrees of
fusion.874 There are 20-30 patches per patient.874
Second, the mucosal surface is pockmarked with ~100 million
pit-like structures ~50 microns in diameter called intestinal glands
or crypts of Lieberkuhn (Fig. 8.21). Their depth ranges from 100
microns in the mucosa near the headwaters of the small intestine to
700 microns far downstream in the large intestine.872 The glands
collectively secrete 2-3 liters/day of fluid.853 The secretion is an
alkaline fluid (pH ~ 7.6) somewhat resembling pancreatic juice,
but includes considerable cellular debris resulting from the sloughing
of cells from the mucous lining of the intestine. The secretion also
contains mucus and digestive enzymes including enterokinase to
activate the trypsinogen of the pancreatic juice (converting it to
trypsin), peptidases to break down protein fragments left behind by
pepsin and trypsin, maltase to break maltose into glucose, sucrase
to break sucrose (table sugar) into halves forming glucose and fructose,
lactase to break lactose (milk sugar) into glucose and galactose, and two
nucleic acid digesting enzymes (ribonuclease and deoxyribonuclease).
The secretory activity of the intestine is influenced by nervous,
hormonal (e.g., enterocrinin), and mechanical stimuli, and again
provides many navigationally-useful chemical gradients.
Third, there are ~5 million villi studding the entire mucosa of
the small intestine (Fig. 8.21). Each villus is a fingerlike outgrowth of
the mucous membrane averaging ~200 microns wide and ~1000
(range 500-1500) microns in length. (For comparison, a micron-scale
nanorobot is about the size of one of the stipple dots in Figure 8.21.)
Villi are taller and more numerous in the duodenum and jejunum
(~20-40/mm2
) than in the ileum (~15-30/mm2
),848 and collectively
increase the effective absorptive surface of the small intestine to
~10 m2
. They are leaf-shaped in the proximal duodenum, change
to tongue-shaped by the upper jejunum, and finally become slender
and finger-shaped in the ileum936—probably all morphologically
distinguishable for navigational purposes using a high-resolution
navigational network (Section 8.3.3). Villi have a skin of simple
columnar epithelial cells adapted for nutrient absorption and contain a
capillary loop, a central lymphatic (lacteal) and connective tissue.
Each villus is also provided with a small lengthwise strip of smooth
muscle. During fasting, the villi lie flat on the mucosal surface and
are inactive; when exposed to the intestinal contents during digestion,
they become erect and perform a lashing movement driven by
rhythmical shortenings and lengthenings. These movements accelerate
the flow of blood and lymph, and mechanically assist absorption by
stirring the liquids of the gut in the immediate neighborhood.
Fourth, the surface area covered by the absorptive mucosal cells
of the villi is also increased many times, estimated to be 14- to
39-fold, by the striated or brush border which consists of minute
processes or microvilli projecting vertically into the lumen (not
shown in Figure 8.21). These microvilli are extremely regular in size
and evenly spaced: ~1 micron long, ~0.1 micron in diameter,848
and numbering ~1000 microvilli/cell.938
Our touring nanorobot now leaves the ileum and enters the
headwaters of the large intestine (the colon) through the ileocecal
valve (valvula Bauhini), moving into the cecum. The ileocecal
sphincter normally remains mildly contracted to slow the passage
of chyme into the cecum. Immediately after a meal, a gastroileal
reflex forces any chyme that remains in the ileum out into the cecum,
and intensifies ileal peristalsis; the stomach hormone gastrin also
relaxes the valve.853 Thus ileocecal-resident nanorobots can usually
infer the taking of a meal, even though the ileocecal sphincter contracts
more tightly if the cecum becomes distended. In many animals, the
bulbous cecum is a storehouse where fermentation can take place.
In humans, the cecum is of no particular use. At the bottom of the
Fig. 8.21. Expanded view of the surface of the small intestine
(redrawn from Mitchell and Arey872).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 227
cecum (~20-30 mm from the ileocecal valve) a small appendage is
attached, the vermiform appendix, a twisted and coiled vestigial
tube that also serves no useful purpose but often becomes clogged
and infected, causing acute appendicitis (see also Section 1.2.2).
There is almost no digestion in the large intestine. The task of
the colon is to absorb most of the remaining fluid and electrolytes
from the chyme. Each day ~2000 cm3 of loose watery material is
dehydrated and compacted in the ascending colon, and temporarily
stored in the transverse colon. All but ~100 cm3 of the 500-1500
cm3 of the water that enters the colon daily is absorbed, mostly in
the cecum and ascending colon.853,2180
Structurally, the colonic tube is shirred into sacculations known
as haustra, ~16 mm long segments running along the tube axis.
Each haustrum is defined internally by opposing semilunar folds
(corresponding to the creases on the outer surface) that act as
mechanical baffles to hold the feces steady against lateral accelerations.
There are mixing movements comprised of haustral contractions of
the recesses of the colon, somewhat resembling the segmenting
contractions of the small bowel. Three or four times a day mass
peristalsis occurs, long-wave contractions that begin at the middle
of the transverse colon and drive the more solid contents of the
transverse colon into the descending colon and sigmoidal colon.
Food in the stomach triggers this reflex action. The large intestine is
generally quiet between meals except for mild peristalsis at 3-12
contractions/minute.855
The mucous epithelium of the colon has a single layer of columnar
cells, some of which have become specialized as unicellular slime
glands (goblet cells); the colon coats feces with a thin layer of
mucus to ensure smooth movement. (Amoeba move readily through
the colonic mucus layer,3316 which has an experimentally-measured
mean thickness increasing from 107 microns in the ascending
colon to 155 microns in the rectum.3317) The large intestine has no
villi and no circular folds,750 although absorptive cells on the
colonic surface have a thin striated border (microvilli).935 Intestinal
glands are present, but they secrete mostly mucus. Lymphoid tissue
is present as scattered solitary nodules but there are no aggregated
nodules.
The bacterial population2198 is also of navigational significance.
From the esophagus to the ileocecal valve, the upper tract is relatively
sterile with few live bacteria. That’s because gastric acids whose main
purpose is to break down food more rapidly also act as a disinfectant to
prevent the growth of microbes. The human colon, however, contains
at least 400 species of bacteria,360,3050 with ~15 types of these
accounting for the majority of the intestinal microflora. These bacteria
ferment any remaining carbohydrates and produce surplus vitamins
(e.g., vitamins K and B12) and useful amino acids which are
absorbed in the colon, so the relationship is quite symbiotic. About
one-third of the material in the colon is microbial mass, and up to
half of the stool consists of bacteria.
Having passed through the sigmoidal colon, the traveling
nanorobot finally enters the rectum. The muscular wall of the rectum
is stronger than that of the colon, and that of the anal canal is thicker
still. The rectum has 3-4 crescent-shaped folds (Houston’s valves)
that support the weight of the fecal matter and prevent its movement
toward the anus, where its presence excites a sensation demanding
discharge. The anus is guarded by two sphincters, internal and
external. The internal (involuntary) sphincter is smooth muscle tissue
formed by a thickening of the circular fibers of the muscular coat.
The external (voluntary) sphincter is striated muscle tissue formed
by a separate muscle encircling the lower end of the rectum. The act
of defecation is preceded by a voluntary effort consisting of relaxation
of the external anal sphincter and usually compression of the
abdominal contents by means of straining efforts. Peristaltic waves
then appear in the colon. The entire distal colon, from the splenic
flexure to the anus, may be emptied at one time. The normal frequency
of bowel movements is 3-12 per week among the general population.2180
The 100-200 grams of feces excreted daily are 65-75% water,
5-10% fatty material, and 20%-50% bacterial bodies, with a normal
pH of 7.0-7.5.585,749,2180 Even while fasting, 7-8 grams of feces are
excreted daily. (Further details are in Chapter 26.) The dark brown
color of the normal stool is due chiefly to stercobilin and urobilin,
the reduction products of the action of bacteria on the bile pigment
bilirubin; the high-molecular-mass fraction most responsible for fecal
viscosity is bacterial peptidoglycan.3308
Defecation is also accompanied or preceded by the escape of
intestinal gases, or flatus. Normal volume is 500-1500 cm3
/day, with
normal frequency 6-20 per day.2180 Up to ~500 cm3 of flatus is
nitrogen and some oxygen from swallowed air—it takes ~10 minutes
for swallowed air to descend to the colon.873 Flatus contains other
gases such as carbon dioxide, inflammable hydrogen and methane.
The unpleasant fecal odor is due mainly to skatole and indole,
produced by bacterial action in breaking down amino acids, but
hydrogen sulfide and methyl mercaptan (more pronounced on a
high-protein diet) also contribute. All of these chemical substances
may be quantitatively measured in real time (Section 4.2) by medical
nanorobots traversing the alimentary canal.
A simple map of the ~0.65 m2 cylindrical luminal surface of the
gut (Table 8.8) to ~(200 micron)2 villiary resolution requires just
~16 million pixels or ~130 million bits assuming 8-bit pixels. This
data store can be compactly encoded on ~0.005 micron3 of
hydrofluorocarbon memory tape (Section 7.2.1.1) and may be carried
aboard a micron-scale nanorobot in a storage device only ~0.01
micron3 or ~(0.2 micron)3 in volume. A complete map of the ~10
m2 absorptive surface to ~(20 micron)2 cellular resolution (excluding
the brush border) requires ~25 billion pixels or ~0.2 terabits assuming
8-bit pixels.
8.2.4 Navigational Osteography
The skeleton is the single largest organ system, representing ~14%
of total mass and ~11% of the navigable volume of the human body.
The bony skeleton supports and protects the vital organs—the skull
protects the brain; the spinal column shields the spinal cord and
maintains erect posture; the ribs shelter the heart, lungs, and liver;
pelvic bones protect the kidneys and internal sexual organs.
The total number of bones varies at different ages. At birth, the
human body contains ~270 bones. This number declines slightly
during infancy as a few separate segments join to form single bones.
From young childhood through puberty, the bone count increases
as wrist and ankle bones develop. Post-adolescence, the bone count
steadily declines again with the gradual union of independent bones.
The adult skeleton (Fig. 8.22) consists of 206 bones: 28 skull
bones (8 cranial, 14 facial, and 6 ear ossicles); the horseshoe-shaped
hyoid bone of the neck (which breaks during hanging, choking the
victim to death; see Figure 8.11); 26 vertebrae (7 cervical or neck,
12 thorax, 5 lumbar or loins, the sacrum which is five fused vertebrae,
and the coccyx, our vestigial tail, which is four fused vertebrae); 24
ribs plus the sternum or breastbone; the shoulder girdle (2 clavicles,
the most frequently fractured bone in the body, and 2 scapulae);
the pelvic girdle (2 fused bones); and 30 bones in each of the four
extremities (a total of 120). The paired bones include the 12 ribs on
either side, 8 wrist bones, 5 hand bones, 14 finger bones, 7 ankle
bones, 5 foot bones, 14 toe bones, 3 auditory ossicles, and the
parietal, temporal, palatine, lacrimal, nasal, upper jaw, cheek, lower
nasal concha, collarbone, shoulder blade, hip, arm, outer and inner
228 Nanomedicine • Volume I
forearm, thigh, kneecap, calf, and shin bones. There are also a variable
number of sesamoid bones, ranging from 8-18 in number, which
are small rounded masses embedded in certain tendons and usually
related to joints.
The total mass of the skeleton is ~10,000 gm; skeletal density
averages ~1.45 gm/cm3
, so total volume is ~6875 cm3
 (Table 8.9).
The total exterior surface area of the bones is ~1 m2
, which may be
mapped to ~(20 micron)2 cellular resolution using 2.5 billion pixels,
requiring ~0.02 terabits of onboard nanorobot memory assuming
8-bit pixels.
More interesting are the interior spaces of bones in which medical
nanodevices may travel. Bone is composed mainly of ~50 nm long
crystals of very dense calcium salts having the hardness of marble
(mostly hydroxyapatite, ~45% of bone mass) held together by bone
matrix containing large numbers of extremely strong ~200 nm-wide
collagenous fibers arranged in a dense mat together with a mucopolysaccharide cement sometimes called “ground substance.” In living
bone, ~25% of bone weight is water and another ~30% is organic
material.870
Embedded in this mineral structure are bone cells of three
types.863 Osteoblasts, which secrete the substances that make up
the bone matrix, line the outer surfaces of bone and also line many
of the surfaces inside the internal cavities of the bone. Osteocytes,
the most numerous bone cell type, originate from osteoblasts when
those cells become trapped within small irregular matrix cavities called
lacunae. After the trapped cells transform into osteocytes, they stop
forming new bone but continue to support normal bone metabolism.
Finally the osteoclasts (large multinucleated cells lining ~3% of
internal bone cavity surfaces) remove old bone when it needs repair.
Osteoclasts may be stimulated by parathyroid (endocrine) hormone
to cause bone absorption when extra calcium ions are needed in the
extracellular fluid. Bone is continually being resorbed and rebuilt
to maintain its structural integrity.
Most of the compact bone is laid down in concentric layers, or
lamellae, both on the outer surfaces of the bone and around the
internal blood vessels that supply nutrition.863 Figure 8.23 illustrates
this lamellar structure of bone, showing that the lacunae (irregular
spaces) containing the osteocytes lie between the successive lamellae
and are interconnected from one layer to another and between
lacuna by small fluid-filled canaliculi averaging ~0.3 microns (range
0.1-1.0 micron) wide.935-936 The largest (Haversian) canal lies at
the center of each system of concentric lamellae. Haversian canals
are ~20 microns wide and carry blood vessels, lymph vessels, nerves,
and also connect with the lacunae via the canaliculi. All osteocytes
lie within ~200 microns of a blood capillary.936 The entire Haversian
system allows nutrient and calcium flow through the bone interior
volume and provides convenient navigable channels which medical
nanorobots may utilize to gain direct access to bone cells and matrix
materials.
Compact bone (providing the principal structural bearing
strength of the body) is formed on the exterior of all bones. Deeper
inside, the bone becomes a more open latticework with large spaces,
called spongy or cancellous bone, whose solid parts nevertheless have
an internal structure similar to compact bone. In the long bones of
the extremities, the epiphyses (end knobs) are composed of spongy
bone covered by a thin layer of compact bone. The diaphysis (central
shaft) is made up almost entirely of compact bone surrounding a
cavity containing marrow. Covering the entire bone is the periosteum,
a nutrient-carrying fibrous membrane investing the surfaces of bones,
except at the points of attachment of tendons and ligaments (where
cartilage is substituted). The periosteum has an outer fibrous layer
composed of dense fibrous tissue with blood vessels and an inner
osteogenic layer containing many fibroblasts.750 Blood vessels
Fig. 8.23. Internal cellular structure of bone (redrawn from Guyton863).
Fig. 8.22. Anterior view of the human skeleton (redrawn from Guyton863).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 229
traversing the periosteum enter the bone and pass through channels
called Volkmann’s canals to enter and leave the Haversian canals. In
humans, there are few true voids in the bones.
Bone marrow fills the spaces of spongy bone and the medullary
(marrow) cavity of long bones. It is composed of a supporting
framework of reticular tissue in which there are blood vessels and
blood cells in various stages of development. A thin membrane called
the endosteum, more delicate than the periosteum but resembling
it in structure, lines the medullary cavity. In the adult, there is red
and yellow marrow.750 Red cells and some white cells are formed in
the red marrow; in the newborn all marrow is red, but in the adult
the red marrow is found in the spongy bone such as the proximal
epiphyses of long bones and in the sternum, ribs, vertebrae and
diploe of the cranial bones. Yellow marrow contains many fat cells
and is found in the medullary cavity of long bones, producing
macrophages and granulated white cells. There is ~3 kg of marrow
in the adult body,817 occupying a volume of ~2400 cm3
.
Even the relatively low capillary density of <100/mm2 in bone832
implies a total investiture of ~3 x 108 skeletal capillaries and a total
luminal surface area of ~8 m2 for the entire vasculature, which would
require a ~0.16 terabit vascular map at cellular resolution. A full
cellular map identifying each individual osteocyte in the entire skeletal
system requires ~1 terabit.
An interesting navigable volume within the skeletal system is
the human spine, which averages 71 cm in length in men and 60
cm in women with remarkably little variation.870 The body of each
vertebra has a ring-shaped neural arch, through which passes the
spinal cord. The spinal cord, measuring ~46 cm long and ~1 cm in
diameter, descends from the brain and medulla oblongata through
the foramen magnum and passes through the hollows of the spinal
column, giving off 31 pairs of spinal nerves until it reaches the level
of the disc between the first and second lumbar vertebrae, where
the lower end tapers off to a point called the conus medullaris. The
cord itself (Fig. 8.24) is composed of H-shaped gray matter in the
center, extending forward as the anterior nerve roots (motor control) and backward as the posterior nerve roots (sensory), with solid
white tracts of nerve fibers descending from the brain or
ascending to it.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fills the ventricles of the brain and
the subarachnoid cavity surrounding the spinal cord. The fluid is
formed mainly by the choroid plexuses (large, reddish tufted
organs) in the four ventricles of the brain. The plexuses are rich in
blood vessels and separated from the cavity of the ventricles by only
a single layer of secretory cells, thus affording ready access to the
fluid by medical nanorobots (Chapter 16). The fluid, once formed
in the brain, is later mostly reabsorbed by the arachnoid villi in the
brain, but a small amount drifts slowly downstream along the spinal
cord and is absorbed by the arachnoid villi through the spinal
regions. Among other things, CSF is regarded as “the drainage system
of the brain,” crudely analogous to urine, and the entire fluid volume is
replaced once every ~30,000 sec.
The human body contains 90-150 cm3 of cerebrospinal fluid,
normally maintained at an average pressure of 11 mmHg (range
5-13 mmHg1712). The fluid is clear and watery, normally containing
1-10 white cells/mm3 (all mononucleocytes) and similar chemical
constituents as blood plasma, but with only 0.4% as much protein
as the plasma; to first approximation, it may be regarded as an
almost protein-free filtrate of the blood. The specific gravity of
cerebrospinal fluid is 1.007 (1.0062-1.0082); viscosity at 310 K
typically ranges from 0.7-1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec;3325 and pH averages
7.4 (7.35-7.70), with ~1% (0.85-1.7%) total solids, 6 x 10-4 gm/
cm3 glucose, 2.4-5.0 x 10-6 gm/cm3 cholesterol, and no acetylcholine
or fibrinogen.585 Protein content increases from 1.0 x 10-4 gm/cm3
in the ventricles of the brain, to 1.5 x 10-4 gm/cm3 in the cisterna of
the upper spinal column, to a high of 2.5 (2.0-4.0) x 10-4 gm/cm3
in the lumbar vertebrae585—a potentially useful chemonavigational
gradient.
Most of the ~150 bone joints in the human body are freely movable
diarthroses (Fig. 8.25). There are ball and socket joints, saddle joints,
~40 hinge joints,870 and pivot joints. In the diarthrodial joint, two
or more bones are united by an encircling band of fibrous tissue called
the articular or fibrous capsule. The articular capsule is lined with
8.24. Cross-section of spinal cord (redrawn from Millard, King, and
Showers750).
Fig. 8.25. Diagram of diarthrodial joint (redrawn from Millard,
King, and Showers750).
230 Nanomedicine • Volume I
synovial membrane, and the apposed ends of bone are covered by a
layer of hyaline cartilage, called articular cartilage. The fibrous capsule
is reinforced and strengthened by ligament cords woven into it. Joint
cavities sometimes extend into pouches or recesses or communicating bursae, and the shape of the sac changes with motion, as in
the knee joint.
Synovial fluid, which lubricates and nourishes the joint, is
exuded by the synovial membrane and fills the capsule cavity. There
may be a total of ~30 cm3 of synovial fluid in all of the human body
joints. Synovial fluid is a colorless, viscid mucin-containing material
resembling egg white. The human knee contains ~1.1 cm3 (range
0.13-3.5 cm3
) of synovial fluid at an average osmotic pressure of 11
mmHg (9-13 mmHg). The specific gravity of the fluid is
1.008-1.015; absolute viscosity is highly variable but averages ~160
(4-800) x 10-3 kg/m-sec; pH is 7.39 (7.29-7.45); with 3.4%
(1.2%-4.8%) total solids, 0.7-1.0 x 10-3 gm/cm3 glucose, 8.5 x 10-3
gm/cm3
 mucin, and no fibrinogen.585
There are also ~140 bursae (synovial sacs) in the body, located in
fibrous tissue wherever friction occurs, probably containing at least
~20 cm3 of additional synovial fluid. The best-known include the
subdeltoid bursa, which lies beneath the shoulder muscle; the
prepatellar bursa, located in front of the kneecap; and the Achilles
bursa, which lies between the heel bone and the Achilles tendon at
the back of the heel.
8.2.5 Organography and Histonavigation
Measured by volumes, the typical ~0.06 m3 adult male body
contains ~38% hydrated protein, ~15% fat, ~14% expandable
volumes and ~13% fluids. More importantly, ~60% of the volume
of the human body is comprised of well-defined and highly specialized
organs (Table 8.9) if skin and blood are included, as is commonplace.
Earlier Sections have described numerous physical routes through
which all the organs can be accessed by a traveling medical
nanorobot. Simple maps describing each of these routes can be made
available to the nanodevice within a modest onboard data storage
budget.
In addition to map-reading and precision positional navigation
to ~3 micron accuracy (Section 8.3.3), with the help of a navigational
network a nanorobot might verify that it had arrived at its intended
organ by detecting various asymmetries that exist throughout the
human body. As trivial examples, the heart lies mostly on the left
side of the chest while the liver lies mostly on the right.* The larger
right lung has 3 lobes with 10 secondary bronchi segments, while
the left lung has only 2 lobes and 9 secondary bronchi segments.
The left ventricle of the heart has a muscular wall twice as thick as
the right ventricle. The right lobe of the liver is much larger than
the left lobe, and has a completely different shape. The right ear
statistically is slightly more sensitive than the left ear,827 undoubtedly
involving small-scale anatomical asymmetries. The left and right
halves of the face have distinct physiognomies.
Aside from such gross anatomical measurements, there are many
other (and more convenient) ways for a nanorobot to determine its
histological location in the body. For example, in the kidney, the
tissue pressure (easily measurable by nanosensors) is lower than the
pressure under the tight renal capsule, and tissue pressure is lower
in the brain than in the surrounding cerebrospinal fluid.363 (See
also Section 8.4.2.) The speed of sound varies markedly from tissue
to tissue (Table 6.7). For instance, a grid of nanorobots equipped
with acoustic radiators and ~nanosecond clocks (Section 10.1) could
measure and distinguish the speed of sound in the brain (1550 m/
sec), the kidney (1575 m/sec), and muscle (1600 m/sec) over a grid
distance of ~100 microns (Section 8.3.3). In the human eye, at 20
MHz, the highest acoustic sound velocities are found in the sclera
(1597 ± 20.3 m/sec); the lens exhibits the highest attenuation in
the eye.483
Each tissue has a unique spectral transmission signature at optical
wavelengths. For example, liver looks distinct from bowel because
of differences both in absorbance and in the way the tissue scatters
light (see Section 4.9.4), making feasible automated discrimination
among tissue types.738 Both scattering and absorption measurements
will require at least ~100 micron path lengths (~5 cell widths) for
reliable tissue discrimination, requiring a cooperative activity among
several nanorobots using timed test pulses. A ~1 pW radiator power
budget producing up to ~107 optical photons/sec omnidirectionally
using a ~1 micron2 emitter transmits up to ~103 photons/sec to a
~1 micron2 receiver located ~100 microns away (Section 7.2.3),
which should be adequate for tissue-type discrimination. Tissues
might also be distinguished based on cell membrane electrical
conductivity (Section 4.8.7).
Each organ has a unique macroscale chemical signature. For instance, the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland (the adenohypophysis) is particularly rich in endocrine hormones including
somatotropin (growth hormone), thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). By contrast, the
posterior lobe of the pituitary gland (the neurohypophysis) is rich
in neuropeptides such as oxytocin and vasopressin.750 Grey matter,
white matter, and myelin in human brain tissues have distinctive
lipid compositions.1014
In some cases, the local distribution of vitamin concentrations
alone might be probative. Table 8.10 gives vitamin concentrations
for various tissues,585 which may reflect chemical variations present
in the intracellular fluids, the constituent cells, or both. Thiamine
(B1) occurs both free and phosphorylated,749 with elevated concentrations in the heart, liver, and kidneys, and low amounts in the stomach
and skin; larger stores of riboflavin (B2) exist in the kidney and liver
than elsewhere; niacin (B3) is more prominent in the liver and skeletal
muscle; inositol is concentrated most heavily in the brain, kidney,
and spleen. Cobalamin (B12) is stored primarily in liver, kidney,
lungs, and spleen.752 Vitamin A (retinol) is fat-soluble and is stored
principally in ester form in the liver but also in the lungs and
kidneys.749 Water-soluble vitamin C (ascorbic acid) is present in
highest concentration in tissues of high metabolic activity, most
notably the adrenal and pituitary glands and in the intestinal wall.749
Vitamin D (cholecalciferol) is most concentrated in the skin,752 while
vitamin E is stored mainly in the heart, lungs, muscles, and fatty
tissues,749 and vitamin K is absorbed through the colon and stored
in the liver;752 all three are fat-soluble. With enough chemical markers
to choose from, a nanorobot equipped with suitable chemosensors
can make high-probability locational inferences.
Tissues also have unique extracellular matrices (ECM) that can
be sampled and identified by traveling nanorobots (Section 9.4.4.2).
For example, 19 different forms of collagen have been identified in
various tissues, including 5 fibrillar types, 1 network-forming type,
4 fibril-binding types, 2 short-chain types and 1 long-chain anchoring
type.971,1497,1498 Types III and VIII are found only in cardiovascular tissue, Type VII is found only in the skin, and so forth.521
* Normally the major lobe of the liver is on the right side of the abdomen and the spleen is on the left side, but about one in 10,000 patients is born with situs inversus—
a reversal of the left-right positions of these organs.1127
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 231
Glycosaminoglycans (a component of the glycocalyx and ECM,
usually complexed with proteins to form mucoproteins) are also
tissue specific. For instance, chondroitin sulfates are found in cartilage,
bone, and cornea. Keratin sulfate I is found in the cornea, keratin
sulfate II in loose connective tissue, heparin in mast cells, heparan
sulfate in skin fibroblasts and the aortic wall, and hyaluronic acid in
synovial fluid, vitreous humor, and loose connective tissue.996 It
appears that ECMs contain embedded structures and glycoproteins
(e.g., osteonectin, tenascin) unique to each tissue type that should
be recognizable to nanorobots even in the complete absence of cells.
Intermediate filaments comprising the cytoskeleton inside the cell
are also tissue-specific (Section 8.5.3.11).
Finally, organs may be identified by examining the surface antigens
of their constituent cells. This is the most powerful technique. For
Table 8.9. Mass, Volume, and Scale Size of the Organs of the Human Body585,749,817,854,881,1973
Fluid, Tissue, Total Total Size Scale
Organ, or Organ Mass Volume per Organ
System (gm) (L3 ~ cm3
) (L ~ cm)
Avg. Adult Male Body 70,000 60,000 ~ 40
Muscle 30,000 23,000 --
Fat 10,500 12,000 --
Integument (total:) 6,100 5,500 --
Skin 2,000 1,800 --
Subcutaneous tissue 4,100 3,700 --
Skeleton (total:) 10,000 6,875 --
Cortical bone 4,000 2,235 --
Red marrow 1,500 1,200 --
Yellow marrow 1,500 1,200 --
Cartilage 1,100 845 --
Trabecular bone 1,000 670 --
Periarticular tissue 900 725 --
Lymph ~ 2,000 ~ 2,000 --
Lymphoid tissue 1,400 1,350 --
Gastrointestinal tract 2,000 1,800 --
Contents (chyme/feces) ~ 2,000 ~ 2,000 --
Blood vessels 1,800 1,700 --
Contents (blood) 5,600 5,400 --
Liver 1,650 1,470 11.7
Brain 1,400 1,350 11.1
Nerve trunks 340 330 --
Cerebrospinal fluid 90-150 90-150 --
Spinal cord 38 36 --
Lungs (2) 825 775 9.8
Contents (air) ~ 7.7 ~ 6,000 --
Heart 330 300 6.7
Chamber volume -- 450 --
Kidneys (2) 300 270 5.2
Spleen 155 145 6.6
Urinary bladder 150 140 ~12
Contents (urine) ~ 500 ~ 500 --
Digestive fluids ~ 150 ~ 150 --
Pancreas 110 100 4 x 15
Salivary glands (6) 50 48 2.0
Synovial fluid ~ 50 ~ 50 --
Teeth (32) 42 14 0.8
Thyroid gland 40 36 3.3
Testes (2) male 40 37 2.6
Uterus (virgin/post-preg.) 35/110 30/100 ~5
Eyeballs (2) ~12 10.8 2.4
Hair (avg. haircut) 21 16 --
Prostate gland 20 18 2.6
Adrenal gland (2) 20 18 2.1
Thymus gland 16 14 2.4
Ovaries (2) (female) 8 7.2 1.5
Gallbladder 7 7 3 x 8
Contents (bile) ~ 50 ~ 50 --
Fingernails & toenails (20) 1.1 0.9 0.3
Pituitary gland 0.61 0.57 0.8
Pineal gland 0.2 0.18 0.5
Parathyroid glands (4) 0.15 0.14 0.3
estimated for 70 kg adult male.
232 Nanomedicine • Volume I
instance, T cell receptors may be organ-specific: those comprised of
γ 2 subchains are found in the spleen, γ 3 in the skin, γ 4 in the
female reproductive organs and the tongue, and γ 5 in the lining of
the intestinal tract.882 Protein components of the matrix, such as
laminin and fibronectin, bind to specific integrin molecules on cell
surfaces; through these 20+ integrins, the ECM transduces signals
that regulate intracellular tissue-specific gene activity.971The plasma
membrane class B scavenger receptor for high-density lipoproteins,
known as SR-BI, is expressed primarily by liver, ovarian, and adrenal
cells.1038 Cell type identification is a major topic that is addressed at
length in Section 8.5.2.2.
Must a bloodborne nanorobot exit the bloodstream and enter
the tissues in order to determine its proximity to the target organ?
Most endothelial cells that coat the blood vessels servicing an organ
or tissue system are likely to display organ-specific antigens on their
luminal surfaces (Section 8.5.2.2). In these cases, organ homing
can be accomplished without exiting the blood vessels, simply by
sampling the antigenic signature of the vessel luminal walls. However,
in some cases it may be necessary for a nanorobot to penetrate the
endothelial layer and directly examine the surfaces of the underlying
tissue cells or the underlying ECM to determine proximity to the
target organ.
Once a nanorobot verifies that it has arrived at the intended
organ, the next major challenge is intraorgan navigation. This may
be accomplished by following standardized maps which may be
customized to the individual patient by prior somatographic surveys
(e.g., Section 8.4.1.4) and supplemented with direct positional and
chemonavigational techniques. A complete somatographic description
of all the organs in the body is beyond the scope of this book, especially
since relevant material is readily available in the well-known Handbook
of Physiology series published by the American Physiological Society,
and in anatomy,853,854,863,866 histology867,935,936 and cytology531,938,939 textbooks generally. However, it is instructive here to
convey a sense of place and scale by briefly reviewing the internal
structure of the largest gland in the human body, the liver (see position
in Figure 8.16).
The liver is a soft, plastic organ whose surface is pushed in by
the surrounding organs. Thus the smaller left lobe bears concave
impressions of the esophagus and stomach, while the larger right
lobe bears concave impressions of the duodenum, the transverse
colon, and the kidney.
Histologically, the liver is comprised of ~250 billion hepatic cells
averaging ~18 microns in size. The human liver contains ~6 different
cell types, but hepatocytes constitute ~80% of the cell population
of the liver.935 The hepatocyte has 1-3 spherical nuclei (depending
Table 8.10. Vitamin Concentration in Various Human Organs585
Thiamine Riboflavin Niacin Biotin Inositol Pantothenic acid
Human Tissue (gm/cm3
) (gm/cm3
) (gm/cm3
) (gm/cm3
) (gm/cm3
) (gm/cm3
)
Serum 0.01-0.09 x 10-6 0.03-0.04 x 10-6 0.02-0.15 x 10-5 0.09-0.16 x 10-7 0.03-0.07 x 10-4 0.06-0.35 x 10-6
Whole blood 0.03-0.10 x 10-6 0.15-0.60 x 10-6 0.5-0.8 x 10-5 0.07-0.17 x 10-7 -- 0.15-0.45 x 10-6
Mammary gland 0.43 x 10-6 2.4 x 10-6 1.0 x 10-5 0.4 x 10-7 2.7 x 10-4 3.9 x 10-6
Skin 0.52 x 10-6 1.2 x 10-6 0.86 x 10-5 0.22 x 10-7 2.0 x 10-4 3.1 x 10-6
Ileum 0.55 x 10-6 4.2 x 10-6 1.9 x 10-5 0.6 x 10-7 7.5 x 10-4 5.3 x 10-6
Stomach 0.56 x 10-6 5.2 x 10-6 1.9 x 10-5 1.9 x 10-7 7.6 x 10-4 6.1 x 10-6
Ovary 0.61 x 10-6 4.3 x 10-6 1.8 x 10-5 0.25 x 10-7 5.8 x 10-4 3.9 x 10-6
Seminal duct 0.69 x 10-6 1.0 x 10-6 0.92 x 10-5 0.15 x 10-7 <1.0 x 10-4 2.0 x 10-6
Testicle 0.80 x 10-6 2.0 x 10-6 1.6 x 10-5 0.9 x 10-7 16.0 x 10-4 5.0 x 10-6
Colon 1.0 x 10-6 2.1 x 10-6 1.3 x 10-5 0.9 x 10-7 7.8 x 10-4 5.0 x 10-6
Spleen 1.1 x 10-6 3.6 x 10-6 2.3 x 10-5 0.6 x 10-7 10.3 x 10-4 5.4 x 10-6
Skeletal muscle 1.2 x 10-6 2.0 x 10-6 4.7 x 10-5 0.35 x 10-7 4.5 x 10-4 12.0 x 10-6
Smooth muscle 1.2 x 10-6 2.3 x 10-6 3.1 x 10-5 0.6 x 10-7 5.8 x 10-4 6.2 x 10-6
Lung 1.5 x 10-6 1.9 x 10-6 1.8 x 10-5 1.9 x 10-7 4.0 x 10-4 5.0 x 10-6
Adrenal gland 1.6 x 10-6 8.2 x 10-6 2.4 x 10-5 3.5 x 10-7 6.9 x 10-4 8.0 x 10-6
Brain 1.6 x 10-6 2.5 x 10-6 2.0 x 10-5 5.8 x 10-7 15.1 x 10-4 15.0 x 10-6
Liver 2.2 x 10-6 16.0 x 10-6 5.8 x 10-5 7.4 x 10-7 6.6 x 10-4 43.0 x 10-6
Kidney 2.8 x 10-6 20.0 x 10-6 3.7 x 10-5 6.7 x 10-7 12.4 x 10-4 19.0 x 10-6
Heart 3.6 x 10-6 8.3 x 10-6 4.1 x 10-5 1.7 x 10-7 5.0 x 10-4 16.0 x 10-6
Fig. 8.26A. Geometric arrangement of hexagonal lobules in the liver
(redrawn from Cormack936).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 233
upon cell volume and position in the structure), each containing a
nucleolus. These cells are bathed in flowing blood and arranged
into ~1 million roughly hexagonal functional units ~1 mm wide
called hepatic lobules (Fig. 8.26A). There are no interlobular septa
(membranes separating the lobules) in the human liver.936
Around each hepatic lobule, liver cells form single-cell thick
trabecular or hepatic plates (Fig. 8.26B). Portal blood from the gastrointestinal tract enters the portal vein through the hepatic plate,
carrying absorbed nutrients into the portal venules. Each portal
venule opens directly into large numbers of venous sinusoids (open
cavities) formed by liver cells. The hepatic sinusoids form rich
vascular networks with extensive but irregular anastomoses, making a
three-dimensional spongework. Blood filters through the sinusoids
and exits via the central vein (Fig. 8.26C), from which it flows into
the hepatic venous system and from there into the inferior vena
cava. Hepatic arterioles diverging from the hepatic artery supply an
additional ~25% of the blood flow through the lobule, enriching
the venous blood with freshly oxygenated red cells.
Bile canaliculi 1-2 microns wide936 lie between adjacent liver
cells, forming networks of polygonal meshes each surrounding an
individual hepatic cell. The canaliculi empty into a bile ductule at
the periphery of the lobule. The ductules, in turn, join other ductules,
producing vessels of increasing diameter, leading eventually to the
wide hepatic duct and the common bile duct beyond.
The lymphatic system of the liver begins in the spaces of Disse,
which lie between the surfaces of the hepatic plates and the endothelial
walls of the venous sinusoids (Fig. 8.27). This perisinusoidal space
contains blood plasma but no red cells or platelets, and is lined with
vast numbers of microvilli projecting from the sinusoidal surface of
the hepatocytes bordering the space.936 The spaces of Disse empty
into small lymphatic vessels that run alongside the portal venules.
The sinusoid endothelial cells are flat and thin, with only their
nuclei protruding slightly into the sinusoid lumen. Their walls are
perforated with large fenestrae (~1 micron openings) numbering
~0.1/micron2
. The fenestrations are dynamic structures that undergo
changes in size and number in response to hormones and
cytoskeletal fiber inhibitors.884,885 There are also numerous smaller
pores measuring ~0.1 microns in diameter, mostly organized into groups
of 10-15 pores called sieve plates (Fig. 8.27). Sieve plates are ~0.7
microns wide and number ~0.3 plates/micron2 .
936 These openings
admit particulate material into the Disse space, for disposal by
Kupffer cells.
Kupffer cells are ~15-20 micron stellate macrophagic cells,
mechanically attached to the sinusoid endothelial cells. They partially
occlude the sinusoid lumen but have no functional attachments to
the endothelial cells or the hepatocytes. Kupffer cells are motile and
have the ability to phagocytize (engulf and digest) particles of dirt,
inert nanodevices (engulf and transport; Chapter 16), worn-out
blood cells, and bacteria. Their customary positioning, predominantly
at the periportal end of the sinusoids, confirms that they monitor
arriving blood, looking for particles to remove from the flow. There
are ~25 billion Kupffer cells in the liver,884,886 with a lifepsan of many
months.
With ~106 hepatic lobules each containing ~250,000 liver cells,
a connectivity map listing every hepatocyte requires a 20-bit lobular
address plus an 18-bit cellular address (within the lobule). Thus a
Fig. 8.26B. Plate structure of a liver lobule (redrawn from Guyton863). Fig. 8.26C. Schematic of flow geometry across a liver lobule (modified
from Cormack936).
Fig. 8.27. Expanded view of hepatocyte neighborhood (Kupffer cells
omitted; modified from Elias883).
234 Nanomedicine • Volume I
simple hepatic lobular map (~1 mm resolution) takes just 20 megabits
but a complete hepatic cellular map (~18 micron resolution) requires
250 billion 38-bit addresses, for a total map size of ~9.5 terabits. Of
course, such complete maps may rarely be needed, since most medical
nanorobotic tasks involve operations to be performed on a relatively
small number of cells, or on a serendipitous basis, or can be guided
by chemonavigation (Section 8.4.3).
8.3 Positional Navigation
Positional navigation should allow a medical nanorobot to know
its three-dimensional coordinate position to ~micron accuracy at
all times. A nanodevice may rely upon dead reckoning, cartotaxis,
microtransponder network alignment, or triangulation on external
beacon signals, as described below.
8.3.1 Dead Reckoning
Perhaps the simplest but least accurate method of positional
navigation is dead reckoning—the determination of position by
keeping an account of the distance and direction traveled, without
reference to any exogenous sources of information other than the
beginning point. For example, starting from a well-defined initial
location, a legged nanorobot counts the exact number of footfalls
taken in all directions; the measured length of each footfall gives the
distance traveled. However, anchor points on biological membranes
are positionally unstable (Section 9.4.3.1), so a micron-sized bipedal
walker with a 100-nm leg stride that achieves even a very optimistic
1% footpad positional stability (~1 nm) during each leg placement
cycle will find that the accumulated error in its computed position
has reached one body length (~1 micron) after just 1000 strides, or
~100 microns (~100 body-lengths) of locomotion. This level of
accuracy is equivalent to ~one cell-width of error per ~2 mm
(~20,000 strides) of travel.
Accuracy may be at most 2 orders of magnitude better when
negotiating hard or very firm surfaces such as tooth enamel or bone.
The classical positional variance of a telescoping nanomanipulator
capable of 100 nm of horizontal travel is at best 0.01 nm (Section
9.3.1.4); a device stiffness of ~10 nN/nm gives a limb deflection of
~0.1 nm if ~nN forces are applied, resulting in a measurement error
of 0.01%-0.1% at each footfall. Additional measurement errors due
to varying strains caused by fluctuating normal bone loads are of
similar magnitude. For example, strain ~ m g / E A ~ 0.01% for the
~2.5-cm diameter human femur, taking a human mass of m ~ 102
kg supported by two femurs of total cross-sectional area A ~ 10
cm2
, with Young’s modulus E ~ 1010 N/m2 for wet compact bone
(Table 9.3) and acceleration of gravity g = 9.81 m/sec2
. Pressures
exerted during chewing may reach 10-100 atm (Chapter 28), giving a
maximum natural strain on tooth enamel of (107 N/m2
) / E ~ 0.01%,
taking E = 7.5 x 1010 N/m2
 for enamel (Table 9.3).
Navigational accuracy via dead reckoning may be up to 1-2
orders of magnitude poorer in other cases, especially during
nanorobot swimming (Section 9.4.2) which requires additional
corrections for fluid motions relative to surfaces.
Sequential monitoring of accelerations and rotations alone
produces even less accurate results. Assuming typical environmental
accelerations of ~0.4 g’s experienced by a 1-micron nanorobot, then
data sampling at ~10 KHz to an accuracy of ~4 x 10-5 g per
measurement (Section 4.3.3.2) yields a cumulative error of ~0.4 g
after ~104 measurements, a mere 1 second of travel. Pendular
orientation sensors accurate to ~2 milliradian (Section 4.3.4.2)
produce ~1 radian of accumulated error after a non-recalibrated
chain of just 500 measurements.
Dead reckoning is most useful in two special circumstances:
1. hard-frozen tissues presenting immobile and highly anchorable
surfaces; and
2. localized navigation requiring only very short distances to be
traversed, such as locomotion between organelles in cyto or where
abundant functional or positional cues allow frequent
recalibration of the estimated current location.
8.3.2 Cartotaxis
Another positional navigation technique is simple
landmark-centered map-following, or cartotaxis. Consider a
nanorobot that wishes to crawl to a specific 1 micron2 patch on the
subvilliary mucosal surface of the small intestine. Ignoring the villi
and microvilli but including the circular folds, the mucosal surface
of the small intestine is ~1 m2
 (Section 8.2.3), at worst requiring a
map of ~8 terabits to achieve 1 micron2
 resolution using 8-bit pixels.
A more compact map might include only the positions, sizes
and shapes each of the ~100 million 50-micron-wide intestinal glands
dotting the surface of the small intestine at least ~100 microns apart.
These dots form a pattern unique to each person that changes slowly
over time. After defining a two-dimensional intestinocentric coordinate system, two coordinates of log2 (106
) ~ 20 bits each can specify
a location to 1-micron accuracy on a 1 m2 surface. Using 20 bits
each for the two surface coordinates, 20 bits each for the major and
minor elliptical axes framing the gland aperture, and another 920
bits to record unique topographic features of each hole, a complete
small intestinal gland map requires at most ~1000 bits/gland or
~0.1 terabits.
This data storage requirement may be significantly further
reduced by recognizing that on its way to its destination, an efficient
~10 micron3 surface-walking nanorobot need pass over at most
0.002% of the 1 m2 of small intestinal surface recorded on the map
described in the previous paragraph, even assuming a
maximum-length 4-meter whole-intestine traverse, passing at most
a total of 4 m / 100 microns = 40,000 identified glands each requiring
~1000 bits to describe. Hence the minimum intestinoglandular map
required for this longest traverse could in theory contain as few as
~40 megabits of data for a perfectly navigating nanorobot using a
perfectly compiled and absolutely stable map. As a practical matter,
to ensure reliability the onboard map conservatively should contain
complete intermediate annular ring segment recalibration maplets
at least ~500 microns in length along the tube axis and spaced
~2 cm apart, to be sequentially encountered axially while traveling
down the tube. Nanorobots use dead reckoning to navigate between
these guide rings until the ring closest to the destination is
reached, analogous to the mid-course correction areas employed
by cruise missiles. Having arrived at this nearest ring, the nanorobot
follows a final map swath ~500 microns wide leading directly to the
three glands lying closest to the destination patch; the final 1 micron2
target patch is reached by interpolation and dead reckoning between
these last three glands. Reliability and efficiency are enhanced by
using large numbers of intercommunicating nanorobots simultaneously
(Sections 7.3.2 and 8.3.3). This ~1 gigabit “practical map” contains
complete descriptions of ~1 million individual intestinal glands and
may be stored in a ~0.1 micron3 onboard data spool using
hydrofluorocarbon memory tape (Section 7.2.1.1).
The above scenario describes the ideal case. In actual living systems,
biological surfaces are constantly in motion, are coated with slime,
and are frequently being remodeled. Some mucosal surfaces may
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 235
replace their entire luminal cell population every ~105 sec (~1 day).*
Thus the precise shapes and features of individual intestinal glands
are constantly changing, although their larger structures and the
pore pattern may remain intact for considerably longer periods of
time. Intestinal glands are easily located by moving in the direction of
rising concentration of enzyme-loaded intestinal juice, a basic
chemonavigational technique (Section 8.4.3), and villiary trunks
are available to provide additional cartographic guidance. But
cartotaxic nanorobots will achieve the best results by using only the
most recently prepared maps.
8.3.3 Microtransponder Networks
The archetypal high-resolution (~3-micron) internal navigational
network may be described as a set of ~1011 mobile acoustic transponder nanodevices, or navicytes, uniformly deployed throughout
a ~0.1 m3 human body volume with an average 100-micron spacing.
(Power consumption rises sharply for much larger spacings.) Total
navicyte fleet volume is a relatively unobtrusive ~1 cm3
. Navicytes
emitting omnidirectional ~100 MHz acoustic signal packets using
r = 1 micron radiators are ~50% energy efficient (Section 7.2.2).
Navigational signal packets are ~1 microsec in duration (conveying
~100 bits/packet) and repeat at ~1 millisec intervals (~1 KHz), giving a
duty cycle of fduty ~ 0.1% which leaves plenty of clear air time for
positional information inquiries from non-navigational nanorobots,
communications and sensor traffic, local acoustic microscopy and
the like, and also to allow staggered time slots to avoid noise and
crosstalk.
How is a 100 MHz packet signal detected in a 1 nanosec signal
processing time? At SNR = 2 (Section 4.5.1), a navicyte acoustic
sensor must receive at least kT eSNR ~ 30 zJ within a 1 nanosec
integration, an energy influx rate of ~30 pW at the receiver. To
produce 30 pW at a 1-micron receiver located 100 microns away, a
transmitter of equal area must radiate ~300,000 pW of acoustic
output (see Section 4.9.1.5) or ~105 watts/m2 for ~1 nanosec. Thus,
each navigational signal packet is prefaced by a triangular pulse ~1
nanosec in duration. This triangle pulse is used for ranging.
Because the transmitter is ~50% efficient, each triangle pulse
requires ~600,000 zJ of input energy to the transmitter in order to
produce an acoustic output energy of 300,000 zJ/pulse at the
transmitter surface. Broadcasting ~1000 pulses/sec brings the
required transmitter input power to ~600 million zJ/sec or ~0.6
pW continuous. Transmitting the non-pulse portions of all packets
costs ~60 pW (Section 7.2.2.2). Note that the 1 nanosec triangular
ranging pulse has the highest frequency that can be used without
significant absorption. Given a pulse which deposits a small fixed
multiple of kT at the receiver, then using the highest frequency
produces the least uncertainty in distance. Very roughly, a pulse
which is just barely detectable can have its timing localized to ~1
pulse width.
The triangle pulses make ~9 atm acoustic spikes in water, probably
low enough to avoid transient cavitation at this frequency and too
brief for shock wave formation or stable cavitation (Section 6.4.1)—
though it might be a good precaution to vary the time intervals
between packets to preclude any possibility of unexpected resonances.
Acoustic torque and related effects (Section 6.4.1) cannot yet be
ruled out in this application and should be investigated further.
Each triangular pulse represents an energy discharge event requiring a
momentary power density of ~1012 watts/m3 inside a ~(0.8 micron)3
powerplant, comparable to power densities available in mechanical
(Section 6.3.2), chemical (Section 6.3.4.5), and electrical (Section
6.3.5) systems. At ~100 pW/navicyte, total navicyte network system
power consumption is ~10 watts, well within proposed in vivo
thermogenic limits (Section 6.5.2).
How is the navigational network established? For convenience,
a navigational Prime Centrum is established on the ventral surface
of the 10th thoracic vertebra (T-10) at the midsagittal plane of the
vertebral body (see Figures 8.22 and 8.24), defining a permanent
origin for a body-centered coordinate system. This origin is centrally
located, lying directly posterior to the xiphoid process (Fig. 8.22)
and the liver, directly inferior to the heart and between the two
lungs. The site is easily accessible by bloodborne nanorobots,
well-supplied with oxygen and glucose for power, securely anchorable
due to the dense bone, and reasonably well-protected from injury;
also, movements in the thoracic vertebrae are the most restricted
because the ribs and costal cartilages resist distortion.
The Prime Centrum is comprised of four “monument” type
bloodborne navicytes which are injected, or migrate stochastically
using cytoidentification (Section 8.5.2), or are directed to the site
by demarcation or other means. These nanorobots congregate around
the chosen navigational origin approximately at the vertices of a
square. Each monument navicyte attaches one end of a retractable
fullerene cable rule to each of its three brethren and crawls backward
on an approximately radial course, paying out the slippery cable
and adjusting mutual positions until the two diagonals measure
exactly 141.42 microns center-to-center and the four normals measure
exactly 100.00 microns center-to-center, guaranteeing a perfect
100-micron square with exact 90.00˚ corners. The four navicytes
then secure themselves to the bone beneath the periosteum using
biocompatible permanent anchors, becoming fully sessile, and
retract the cable rules. If vertebral curvature radius R ~ 2 cm and
diagonal navicyte separation S = 141.42 microns, then maximum
anteroposterior geometric deviation due to off-sagittal positioning
is R(1-sin((π/2)-(S/R))) = 0.5 micron. The square may not be
precisely aligned with the conventional anatomical coordinate axes.
At least 10 independent navicyte monument quartets should be
established as alternate or backup sites on T-10 to satisfy customary
redundancy requirements (Chapter 13). Additionally, ~104 regional
monuments are established at ~cm intervals at fixed positions on all
major skeletal surfaces of the body. Relative positions of regional
monuments vary only within well-defined envelopes depending
upon macroscopic joint rotations and limb flexures, or almost not
at all on inflexible surfaces such as the diaphysis of the long bones.
Mobile navicytes deployed throughout the remaining body
volume receive message packets emitted by neighboring devices,
which in turn have received packets from their neighbors, ultimately
stretching back in an unbroken chain to a regional monument or to
the Prime Centrum. Assuming a simple cubical array, each stationary
navicyte has two neighbors per directional axis—a total of six
neighbors within acoustic communication range (100 microns).
Navicyte positional stability is enhanced by stationkeeping activities to
avoid drift (~1 micron/sec for a 1-micron nanorobot due to
Brownian motion; Section 3.2.1), and anchorage to nonsignalling
elements of the omnipresent extracellular matrix.
Each navicyte possesses an onboard clock capable of continuous
∆τ ~ 1 nanosec temporal accuracy between recalibrations or over
mission times of 103 sec (Section 10.1). Message packets received
* In the fundus, the cell turnover cycle is ~5 days, while in the body of the stomach the whole cycle takes ~1 day. The time required for complete renewal of intestinal epithelium
is ~2.3 days for the duodenum and ~2.8 days for the ileum.359 At the other extreme is the lens of the eye—one of the few structures containing cells that is preserved without
turnover.531
236 Nanomedicine • Volume I
periodically from each neighbor include data describing the exact
universal time of packet transmission. Since each recipient has a
synchronized clock (Section 10.1.3), the triangle pulse travel time
between navicytes (τ ~ 65 nanosec) is known to an accuracy of ~1
nanosec. The speed of sound vsound ~ 1540 in soft tissue (Table 6.7),
so the ~1 nanosec temporal uncertainty adds (vsound ∆τ) ~ 1.5 microns
of uncertainty to the range estimate.
The speed of sound varies between 1400-1600 m/sec for most
nonosseous tissues. This speed is reasonably uniform within specific
tissues (Table 6.7) over time, and is essentially frequency-independent
over the nanomedically-relevant range. Knowledge of its own approximate histological location (based on chemical sampling, etc.) allows
a navicyte to consult an onboard data table or a previously-compiled
low-resolution map (see Chapter 19) to estimate local sound velocity
to within ~25 m/sec. Also, two navicytes (at least one of which is
mobile) can directly measure the local speed of sound by briefly
conjugating (Section 9.4.4.4), extending a cable rule of known
length between them, then transmitting and timing a test pulse
traveling through the medium. A 100-micron rule length allows
local sound velocity to be measured to an average ∆vsound ~ 25 m/sec
accuracy using a 1-nanosec clock. A measurement uncertainty of ~25
m/sec in the local speed of sound adds another (∆vsound τ) ~ 1.6 micron
of positional uncertainty, giving a total of ∆Xmin ~ 3 microns
uncertainty in each range estimate. Additional small uncertainties
in sound velocity and in acoustic reflection and refraction power
losses may occur when capillaries or other microvessels cross the
line of sight between two navicytes.
Only four of the six neighbors are absolutely required for positional
triangulation. The data packet received by a navicyte from its first
neighbor (containing that neighbor’s correct three-dimensional
coordinates) narrows the navicyte’s possible position to a spherical
surface of radius equal to the computed range, centered on the first
neighbor. The data packet received from the second neighbor
defines a second geometric sphere, further narrowing the navicyte’s
possible position to a circle formed by the intersection of the first
and second spheres. The data packet from the third neighbor adds a
third sphere, reducing the possibilities to two points on the intersection
circle, and the signal packet from the fourth neighbor selects one of
these two points as the navicyte’s true position. Additional minor
corrections may be made for the bending of sound waves crossing
known thermal, pressure, or salinity gradients (Section 6.4.1).
What positional accuracy can this system achieve? Consider the
simplest case with many parallel coplanar rows of N navicytes lying
~Xrowi apart, each row of total length Lrow ~ 	 Xrowiemanating from
a common tangential surface and extending deep into the tissues. The
terminal navicyte of each row estimates its cumulative length as
Lrow which also contains an unknown range error εrow. The series of
randomly distributed errors in the positions of each navicyte in the
row, individually of magnitude ± ∆Xmin, do not cancel to zero but
instead constitute a random walk with maximum error excursion from
the mean of εrow ~ 2 N1/2 ∆Xmin. The longest rows will occur in the
viscera, farthest from any bony surface. Taking Lrow = 15 cm, ∆Xmin
= 3 microns and Xrow = 100 microns, then N = Lrow/Xrow = 1500
navicytes per row and εrow ~230 microns. Hence in this simple case,
the minimum accuracy at the terminus of each row is 15 cm ± 230
microns, or ~0.2%. Shorter rows accumulate less error at the
terminus—the cumulative error at ~2 mm from the common surface
is at worst ~27 microns (~1 cell width). The average error per navicyte
in a 15-cm row is only εrow / N ~ 0.2 microns. Even for Lrow = 2
meters (~longest possible transverse path length in the human body),
N = 20,000 and εrow = 800 microns. Note that an additional small
systematic error in position may accrue if there is a systematic change
in local sound velocity between recalibrations and if the subject viscera
have a free surface unbounded by bone. For example, bruised tissue
in which foreign fluids are accumulating will produce a slightly
warped coordinate system; sound velocity differentials between, say,
blood and interstitial fluid may be as large as 70 m/sec (Table 6.7).
Accuracy within each row may be significantly improved by introducing active error checking and continuous recalibration. Consider
the terminal navicytes of two parallel rows A and B. As before, the
rows lie ~Xrow apart in their common plane. Each terminal navicyte
computes that its total length is precisely Lrow, but in fact navicyte B
is in error by a distance εB along the row. Given the minimum range
error ∆Xmin, terminal navicyte B can only detect that an error
exists when its range measurement to neighboring terminal navicyte
A increases from Xrow to Xrow + ∆Xmin, whereupon from simple
geometry:

ε ∆ B row min
2
row
2 = + [ ] (X X ) X− 1 2/ {Eqn. 8.2}
For Xrow = 100 microns and ∆Xmin = 3 microns, then εB ~25
microns or ~1 cell width. This range error is relatively insensitive to
Xrow; for instance, if Xrow increases to 110 microns then εB only
rises to ~26 microns.
However, row terminus errors (measured in integral units of εB)
are likely to be normally distributed between ± εrow ~ 230 microns
in the earlier simplest-case example. The error correction procedure
involves nearest neighbors collectively polling the nearest nrow ~ 6000
rows (a bundle with termini covering ~0.6 cm2 when Xrow = 100
microns) for their measured εB’s and then computing the mean of
the distribution, which has an uncertainty of εrow / nrow1/2 ~ 3
microns = ∆Xmin, matching the uncertainty of a single range measurement, the smallest possible error. The estimated mean is used to
produce a correction factor which is applied to the erroneous estimated
value of Lrow, yielding a corrected Lrow accurate to ~ ∆Xmin or ~3
microns. This corrective process is repeated:
a. for each row,
b. for planar cross-sections at ~2 mm increments along the entire
row length (to eliminate error compression or rarefaction waves),
not just along the terminal plane, and
c. at regular time intervals (~3 sec) to ensure continuous
recalibration to ~3 microns at all points in each row.
Note that parts of the human body frequently may deform up to
~30% during normal activities, so Xrow is not constant but may
vary between 85-115 microns in as little as 0.1-1 sec in working
situations.
Detailed specification of a complete recalibration protocol 1624
is beyond the scope of this book. One procedure to further improve
row-length measurement accuracy is to use the navicyte grid as a
phonon gain medium by configuring each navicyte as a repeater
station during the calibration cycle, effectively allowing the
propagation of row-long pulses thus permitting independent
row-length measurements. Multiple measurements can reduce
independent row-length measurement error to arbitrarily low levels.
Alternatively, J. Soreff suggests treating the entire calibration bundle
as a coherent amplifier using lower acoustic frequencies to increase
range. This enables phase detection to within ~1 nanosec if
phase-locked detection is used and if a few kT of energy are present
in the time resolution window, allowing navicytes to hear a propagating plane wave averaged across an entire bundle. An analysis of
soliton-like systemic effects analogous to intrinsic local modes in
lattices 3036 is beyond the scope of this text.
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 237
The ability to make the corrections described above assumes that
navicytes can distinguish -εB from +εB, an angular spread of ± 14˚
for εB ~ 25 microns and X = 100 microns. Since sound crosses the
width of a micron-sized nanorobot in ~1 nanosec, the relative
angular location of a distant acoustic source can be directly measured
by placing two sensors on either side of the nanodevice at precisely
calibrated separations. For angles of acoustic wave incidence θ,
measured from the axis joining the two sensors which are separated
by a width xsensor on either side of the nanorobot, the wave arrival
times will differ by more than ∆τ ~ 1 nanosec and thus will be
received as two distinct pulses, rather than one. For incidence angles
>θ, the wave arrival times at either side cannot be distinguished.
θ thus defines a permissive angular detection cone of size

θ π ∆τ = − 

 

 −
2 sin v
x
1 sound
sensor
{Eqn. 8.3}
For ∆τ = 1 nanosec and vsound = 1540 m/sec, a sensor separation of
xsensor = 1.59 microns allows up to θ = 0.25 radian = 14˚ to be
distinguished. The uncertainty in vsound of ~25 m/sec imposes a
minimum measurement uncertainty of ∆θ ~ 3˚. The permissive
detection cone shrinks to θ = 0˚ at xsensor = 1.54 microns.
Relative navicyte angle can also be computed from the coordinates
of neighbors by simple geometry. Using the coordinates of a nearest
neighbor with range Xrange = Xrow ~ 100 microns and lateral positional
uncertainty Xerror = ∆Xmin ~ 3 microns, then relative navicyte angle
can only be computed to an accuracy of ∆θ ~ sin-1 (Xerror / Xrange) ~
1.7˚ (~30 milliradians). However, relative angle uncertainty is
reduced if the coordinates of more distant neighbors are available to
the navicyte. For example, using a neighbor located 15 rows away
(Xrange = 15 Xrow) and again taking the minimum Xerror, then ∆θ ~ 0.1˚
(~2 milliradians). Coordinates from a distant-neighbor navicyte with
Xrange = Lrow ~ 15 cm with an uncorrected lateral positional uncertainty
Xerror = εrow ~ 230 microns would give ∆θ ~ 0.09˚ (~2 milliradians);
taking Xerror = ∆Xmin = 3 microns in the ideal case, ∆θ ~ 0.001˚ of
arc (~0.02 milliradian). By comparison, from Eqn. 3.2 Brownian
tumbling of a micron-scale nanorobot amounts to ~10-6˚ (~0.02
microradian) in ~1 nanosec, or ~1˚ (~20 milliradians) between ~1
millisec signal packet repeat intervals.
Each navicyte obtains its own orientation relative to gravity using
onboard gravity sensors, which are accurate to within ~2 milliradians
of verticality, with new measurements available every ~0.1 millisec
(Section 4.9.2.2) or up to the limits of the communication network
capacity (e.g., recalibration protocols). Regional monuments monitor
and disseminate the local grid’s angular orientation relative to the
gravity field at ~1 millisec intervals, thus fixing each navicyte’s
orientation to the local grid on a virtually continuous basis. Absolute
spatial orientation relative to a fixed onboard standard such as a
nanogyroscope (Section 4.3.4.1) may be determined to 1-100
microradian accuracy during nonrecalibrated deployment lifetimes
of 103
-107 sec. Direct gyrostabilization may be possible in some
applications (Section 9.4.2.2).
8.3.4 Vascular Bifurcation Detection
The ~5 billion navicytes circulating in the 5400 cm3 blood volume
can be used to form a dynamic transluminal geometric “virtual lattice”
(with constantly changing membership) that remains positionally
stationary near the bifurcation of each blood vessel whose diameter
exceeds Xrow ~ 100 microns. A spatial progression of such rows
allows the bifurcation break point to be registered at most ~100
microns past the junction and in at most ~20 millisec after leaving
the larger-diameter vessel, for nanorobots drifting with the blood
flow in arterioles. In the high velocity aorta (Table 8.2), minimum
bifurcation detection range increases to ~630 microns in a detection
time of ~1 millisec. Transmission of local navicyte coordinates
allows traveling nanorobots to determine which branch of the
bifurcation they are about to enter, or have already entered. (Major
organs, lymphatic topology, and other important landmarks can be
accurately located by similar methods.)
Bifurcations involving capillaries and other vessels with diameters
less than Xrow may be readily detected by direct acoustic reflection
echolocation from vessel walls (Section 4.8.2). Echoes from red blood
cells are relatively weak (though still measurable)3044 in comparison
with those from the solid tissues within the body because the characteristic impedance of red blood cells is very similar to that of the plasma
in which the cells are suspended.570
8.3.5 Macrotransponder Networks
It has been proposed 888 that a macroscopic acoustic signal source
could be used by individual medical nanorobots to determine their
location within the body, much as handheld radio receivers can use
satellite transmissions (e.g., the 24-satellite Global Positioning System
or GPS)1310 to determine their position on Earth’s surface. Such a
system might involve externally generated signals from beacons
placed at fixed positions outside the skin, or could employ dedicated
internally-installed emitter organs. As described in the
microtransponder example (Section 8.3.3), at least four beacon
signals must be detectable simultaneously to allow a fix to be
determined in three-dimensional space. Macrotransponder networks
may be useful in some applications, but also have several important
drawbacks as described below.
Since in a macrotransponder system the nanorobots determine
their positions by direct detection of beacon range signals rather
than by polling their neighbors, accuracy may be solely a function
of the total range measurement uncertainty ∆Xmin. As before (Section
8.3.3), given a typical signal path length Xpath ~ 15 cm and a mean
vsound ~ 1540 m/sec, signal travel time (τ ~ 97,400 nanosec) is known
to an accuracy of ∆τ ~ 1 nanosec if beacon clocks and nanorobot
clocks are stable and synchronized, adding (vsound ∆τ) ~ 1.5 microns of
range uncertainty.
However, by far the greatest source of uncertainty in a
macrotransponder system is the variation in the speed of sound along
the randomly chosen linear paths through the human body which
the beacon signals must follow. The speed of sound is reasonably
uniform within specific tissues or local regions, but an arbitrary
15-cm path through the body may plausibly involve sound velocities
ranging from 630 m/sec for a path entirely through the lungs up to
~4090 m/sec for a path entirely through the densest skull bone (Table
6.7). This implies a velocity uncertainty range of ∆vsound ~ 3460 m/
sec and thus a maximum range uncertainty of ∆vsound τ ~ 33.7 cm—
approximately the anteroposterior thickness of the human body.
There is also some variation in vsound as a function of temperature
(Section 10.5.5) and other factors.
While local (~100 micron range) sound speed may be measured
on site by one or a small number of nanorobots (Section 8.3.3), the
net sound speed along an arbitrary ~15 cm path cannot be similarly
assessed without a comprehensive survey effort. Pathwise uncertainty
in sound velocity is somewhat reduced by completing a whole-body
survey of vsound as a function of position, then loading this map into
each nanorobot using the navigational system.* In some cases, standardized maps with modest customization will suffice. A whole-body
vsound map to ~(100 micron)3 resolution, giving ∆vsound ~ 25 m/sec,
* This suggests some interesting open problems requiring further computer science research. For instance, how might individual nanorobots know which section of the map
is relevant for them, before they are able to determine their position?
238 Nanomedicine • Volume I
would require ~1 terabit of onboard storage, a minimum 38 micron3
memory tape volume inside a (~4 micron)3 memory mechanism.
Assuming a more reasonable ~1 micron3 tape volume allows a ~0.026
terabit velocity map to be stored onboard, providing ~(340 micron)3
resolution and giving ∆vsound ~ 84 m/sec.
Unfortunately, a measurement uncertainty of ~84 m/sec in the
local speed of sound still adds (∆vsound τ) ~ 8 mm of positional
uncertainty to each ~15 cm range measurement, a ~5% error.
Shortening the average beacon-nanorobot distance to Xpath ~ 1 cm
(e.g., by installing ~60,000 internal emitter organs, which may be
unduly intrusive) reduces positional uncertainty to ~500 microns,
possibly sufficient in some applications.
Adequately stable surfaces on the skin or even inside the body
may be difficult to find for large macroscopic transmitters, causing
significant source movement and degrading the positional accuracy
of the beacons as system monuments. This problem is partially
overcome by using acceleration compensators (e.g., gimbals and
gyros to “float” transmitters), thus neutralizing the effects of minor
body motions. However, because of the minimum ~8 mm range
uncertainty noted above, it will be difficult for beacons to mutually
recalibrate their own positions to high accuracy, so there will be
unavoidable unmonitorable monument movements especially during
rapid joint rotations and limb flexures. And macroscopic transmitters are physically more responsive to the small random centrifugal
and gravitational forces normally experienced by the body than are
microtransmitters, adding to their moment-by-moment positional
uncertainty.
By now, the alert reader will be wondering if measurements of
just the angular positions of at least three externally located macroscopic acoustic beacons, taken without regard to range measurements,
can suffice for accurate navigation. The answer is that an angles-only
system is quite possible, but unfortunately offers little improvement.
(GPS uses 4 satellites so that inexpensive handheld receivers don’t
need accurate clocks and thus can avoid ranging errors. Orbiting
satellites do have atomic clocks and transit time codes, but the
ground-based receiver need only compare time differences between
received signals.)
Consider an acoustic sensor pair with xsensor = 1.54 micron, giving
the minimum possible angular measurement error ∆θ ~ 3˚ (Section
8.3.3). The positional uncertainty ∆x of the nanorobot is then

∆
∆θ
π ∆θ
x ~ X sin( )
sin 2
1
3
N
path
beacon
1/2
− 

 

 

 


{Eqn. 8.4}
where Xpath is the average distance between beacon and nanorobot
and Nbeacon is the number of noncollinear beacons sampled during
each measurement cycle. Assuming an epidermal beacon network
with Xpath = 15 cm, ∆x ~ 8 mm for N = 3 beacons; ∆x ~ 400
microns for N = 1000 beacons.
Beacon signals will also travel many adjacent pathways with sound
speeds that differ only very slightly, producing a multiplicity of
received pulses and a smearing effect, further degrading signal quality.
Signals suffer refraction over such lengthy courses, causing the beam
to bend significantly from its original path in unknown amounts.
By contrast, the acoustic energy received from a pulse traversing a
~100 micron path lies close to the sensor detection limit; these signals
are rapidly attenuated by the medium beyond this limit, and thus
produce no confusing detectable signal at the next navicyte station
located ~200 microns from the transmitter. Another problem with
macrobeacons is that they must use lower frequencies (~100 KHz;
Section 6.4.1) due to the long path lengths their signals must traverse
unamplified, hence maximum data flow rate may be up to ~1000
times slower than for the microtransponder system. Finally,
macrobeacons permit only a one-way flow of navigational information, a major limitation.
8.3.6 Dedicated Navigational Organs
By direct analogy to communication organs (Section 7.3.4),
dedicated macroscopic organs may be implanted in the human body
to facilitate navigation. One important function of such organs
would be to act as central clearinghouses for systemic information
that is normally available only regionally or to individual navicytes.
This information might include updated positions of all regional
monuments, orientations of various grid sectors relative to gravity,
or information on macroscopic rotation rates (e.g., compasses,
gyros) to allow centrifugal and gravitational forces to be distinguished.
Highly accurate chronometers could also be maintained in these
organs (Section 10.1.4) to allow periodic systemwide
resynchronization.
Dedicated navigation organs could serve as the “map rooms” of
the body, collating and organizing new information as it comes in,
maintaining accurate navicyte grid maps, organ maps, vascular maps,
functional maps (Section 8.4), and so forth, possibly in coordination
with dedicated computational organs (Section 10.2.5). A 1 mm3
navigational library node can contain up to ~10 million terabits of
map data, which may be downloaded to nanorobots berthed at
docking ports at rates of up to 0.01 terabit/sec drawing ~50 pW
per docking port during the transfer (Section 7.2.6).
Dedicated navigation organs may be employed as direct interfaces
between internal navigational systems and related macroscopic
external modalities including operating theaters, clinical equipment,
various environmental entities, satellite uplinks, radio antennae,
transportation vehicles, and the like. They could also serve as emitter
organs in GPS-like acoustic navigational systems (Section 8.3.5).
8.4 Functional Navigation
Functional navigation allows a medical nanorobot to detect and
respond to subtle variations in tissue characteristics, often in the
absence of precise positional knowledge. Such tissue characteristics
may include thermal, acoustic or barostatic, cytochemical or
immunochemical, electrical (Section 4.9.3.3) or magnetic,1256
mechanical or topological variations. A few of the many possibilities
are described below.
8.4.1 Thermographic Navigation
8.4.1.1 Thermography of the Human Body
The human body presents a complex and temporally varying
spatial temperature field. The external parts of the body have a lower
mean temperature than the internal parts, with temperature decreasing
along the longitudinal axis of the extremities, producing both axial
and radial temperature gradients. The differing heat production of
individual organs, geometric irregularities, changes in insulation and
evaporation, convective heat transport via the blood, and the diurnal
and other periodic variations3327 add further complexities to the
thermal map.890
The homeothermic core of the body is distinguishable from the
shell, which most readily responds to environmental fluctuations.
The core generally consists of the interior of the thorax and abdomen,
the brain, and part of the skeletal muscles. With moderate changes
in ambient temperature, the shell normally comprises the outermost
20%-35% of the human body.894,895 However, during extreme
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 239
chilling, the shell may enlarge to ~50% of total body volume,
equivalent to a mean layer thickness of 2.5 cm.890 Figure 8.28 shows
the overall distribution of tissue temperatures as a series of isotherms.
Skin temperatures display the greatest thermographic variability
in response to external factors. For example, nude humans standing
for 3 hours in a cold room (5˚C, 50% relative humidity, 0.1-0.2 m/
sec wind speed) experience skin temperature differentials up to 15˚C
(= 13˚C to 28˚C), with the lowest temperatures in fingers and toes,
the highest in trunk and forehead, and average core/surface gradient
~15˚C;896 heat loss is ~10% lower for females due to their thicker
layer of subcutaneous fat, making their cold-room skin temperature
slightly lower than for males.898 After 3 hours in a hot room (50˚C),
skin temperature differentials amounted to only 2.5˚C (= 35˚C to
37.5˚C), with an average core/surface gradient of ~1˚C.896 With
normal clothing in a room at 15-20˚C, mean skin temperature is
32-35˚C.
Skin thermography of the human head was first reported by
Edwards and Burton;897 skin vs. rectal temperatures at various ambient
temperatures are well-studied.893,898 Skin temperature patterns in
neonates reflect near uniform heat conduction through the tissues.917
In childhood, specific patterns develop into a stable, permanent adult
pattern.916 The dermothermal patterns differ in lean and obese
patients, and exhibit a continual state of small rhythmic change.
These changes —probably a result of active vasodilation due to
sympathetic innervation over most of the human skin area919—are
observed over the arms, hands, trunk and head, but are not all in
phase with each other, nor even of the same amplitude.918,919,3334-3338
Skin thermology, including infrared thermography, is now an
important branch of medical diagnostic imaging.899,912 Subcutaneous
(shell) temperatures generally increase with depth.
Human core (rectal) temperature averages 37.0˚C,894 but this
simple number hides considerable natural variation (Table 8.11).
The temperatures of inner organs vary by 0.2-1.2˚C under normal
room conditions, and by up to 0.9˚C within individual organs.890
Temperature gradients within the brain amount to 1.4˚C; the cortex is
cooler than the basal regions, with incoming blood cooler than the
central brain tissue.900 Brain temperature also decreases during sleep
and rises during periods of emotional arousal.901 Cooling or warming
the skin of the head causes temperature changes in the tympanic
membrane (Fig. 7.3) of up to 0.4˚C due to the returning venous
blood.909 Oral temperature can have wide variation, depending for
example on the thermal character of recently ingested food and drink,
and thus has little direct correlation with swings in rectal temperature.910
Liver temperatures lie 0.2-0.6˚C subrectal,902 possibly due to heat
loss via the respiratory tract through the diaphragm. The temperature
of the testes in the scrotum is ~3˚C lower than that of the abdominal
cavity.890 The temperature of the hypothalamus, the seat of human
thermoregulation, might be the most logical choice as a reference
value.890
Human blood temperature also displays considerable variation.
Outflowing blood is warmer than inflowing blood in organs with
high metabolic rates, so the blood has a cooling effect in these
organs, the opposite of the skin. Venous blood temperature in the
extremities may be ~3˚C lower than the arterial supply, but even
the arterial blood can sink to 22˚C in human extremities at cold
room temperatures .903 Blood in the common carotid artery remains
within 0.2˚C of oral temperature, but falls 0.2-0.5˚C as it cools the
face and possibly also due to cooling from the internal jugular vein.905
However, inhalation of cold air has little effect on pulmonary blood
temperature; even for patients in rooms cooled to -18˚C, blood in
the pulmonary vein and artery differ at most by 0.03˚C.906
There are also periodic variations in body temperature. The
diurnal fluctuation is the best known. This cycle is absent in neonates,
but develops during the first weeks of life.913 Children have higher
daytime temperatures than adults and a daily range of 1.7˚C,890
with the daily range peaking near the age of 1 year.894 Precisely
Fig. 8.28. Distribution of isotherms in a human body placed in cold
or hot environment (modified from Wenger and Hardy,865 and from
Aschoff and Wever891).
Table 8.11. Core Temperatures of Organs and Blood Vessels
in the Human Body890,894,904,907
Blood Vessel, Normal
Organ or Tissue Temperature
Skin 32-35˚C
Scrotum 34.0˚C
Sternum 34.5˚C
Subclavian vein 36.4˚C
Liver 36.4-36.8˚C
Oral cavity 36.5-36.6˚C
Transverse facial artery 36.5-36.8˚C
Superior vena cava 36.65˚C
Urine 36.75˚C
Esophagus 36.75˚C
Aorta 36.75˚C
Inferior vena cava 36.75˚C
Pulmonary artery 36.75˚C
Lungs 36.75˚C
Pulmonary vein 36.75˚C
Heart, right ventricle 36.75˚C
Femoral artery 36.75˚C
Common carotid 36.8˚C
Kidney 36.85˚C
Spinal cord 36.95˚C
External jugular vein 37.0˚C
Hepatic vein 37.0˚C
Stomach 37.0˚C
Rectum, mean 37.0˚C
Rectum, range 36.2-37.8˚C
Hypothalamus 37.3˚C
Brain 37.3˚C
Uterus 37.3˚C
240 Nanomedicine • Volume I
standardized tests on young adults found that rectal core temperature
fluctuated between 36.83-38.32˚C in males (range 1.49˚C) and
37.16-38.36˚C (range 1.20˚C) in females,908 with temperatures
normally reaching their lows near 6 AM local time and their highs
near 6 PM.915 (The timing is keyed to environmental influences
such as light/dark cycles, not personal activity.) The menstrual cycle
also involves a complex long period fluctuation. During this monthly
cycle, morning core temperature falls from 37.0˚C to 36.7˚C just
before and during menstruation, after which there is an abrupt dip
to ~36˚C at midperiod near ovulation, followed by a return to normal
levels for the remaining ~2 weeks. Menstrual-related skin temperature
pattern variations are also observed.3329
Finally, there are various irregular influences on body temperature.
Rectal temperature may rise up to 3.5˚C during the most extreme
exercise,821 or may fall 2˚C after ~1 hour immersion in water at
23˚C. Ingesting food elevates skin temperature, and to a lesser
extent the rectal temperature, for 1-2 hours. Alcohol ingestion raises
skin temperature but lowers core temperature, while nicotine
ingestion (e.g., smoking) lowers skin temperature in the extremities
by 2-7˚C. In persons with fever, the temperature may rise from
37.0˚C up to 41.5˚C,916 with daily fluctuations of 2.8-5.0˚C, usually
peaking in late afternoon. Transient elevations to 44-45˚C have been
recorded but are very rare.
In view of this measurable spatial and temporal variability,
maintaining a high-resolution whole-body thermal map in real-time
is impractical using in vivo nanodevices. Given the availability of
~microkelvin sensors with ~microsecond measurement cycles (Section
4.6.1), sensor technology is not the limiting factor. Map stability is
the main concern. A volumetric map with only ~1 mm3 resolution,
comparable to the best thermographic images, requires 108 voxels
and 17 bits/voxel for 0.001˚C accuracy. A hand placed on a stove
produces thermal gradients >10˚C/sec in the shell, but periodic
temporal variations are 0.1-40 microkelvins/sec in the core and
0.005-1˚C/sec in the shell during changes in physical exercise levels
(~3˚C in 10-100 sec), movement between hot and cold environments
(~10˚C in 10-100 sec), and fevers (~5˚C in ~1000 sec). Thus to
maintain a map that reports all changes of 1 millikelvin requires
the entire field to be resampled every 0.001˚C / (1˚C/sec) = 1
millisec, generating ~2 terabits/sec. This dataflow possibly could be
accommodated by a dedicated high-capacity fiber network (Section
7.3.1) but would rapidly overwhelm both a mobile acoustic network
and the data storage capacity of individual bloodborne nanorobots.
Maintaining a hematothermographic map employing
capillary-volume resolution to millikelvin accuracy generates an even
more intractible >1015 bits/sec.
8.4.1.2 Thermal Demarcation
Thermographic navigation to a target site is possible without
the use of any maps. Simple thermal demarcation is a good example
of this. In a controlled room-temperature clinical setting, the relatively
narrow homeostatically-maintained temperature band of 36-38˚C
allows easy demarcation of selected target regions by applying thermal
stimuli lying just outside the normal band. Examples might include
hot (T > 38˚C) or cold (T < 36˚C) packs applied to the skin;
diathermic tissue heating using different frequencies to achieve
selective heating at various tissue depths (Section 6.4.2); adaptive
phased array (APA) heating of small target volumes deep inside the
body;1518 thermally active catheter probe tips inserted transdermally
or otherwise, directed to specified internal targets; or multiple
intersecting focused infrared, visible photon, or ultrasound beams
directed to specific convergence volumes for maximum heating
effect. Depending upon the technique employed and the target
tissue, volumes as small as ~1 mm3 may be demarcated in this manner.
Nanorobots of relatively simple design may be injected near the
target or allowed to circulate in the bloodstream, and will detect the
outlier temperature data and gather in the vicinity of the target at a
statistically determined accumulation rate and number density.
Outside of controlled environments or during prolonged treatment
periods, simple demarcation becomes less reliable for several reasons:
1. Error in the physical placement of the instrument of demarcation
will produce erroneous nanorobot localization, which may
increase the likelihood of treatment error. Such iatrogenic
mistakes are especially likely during time-critical or emergency
crises, or in situations where the diagnosis is unclear, or in cases
of self-administered medical care.
2. Even when initially correctly placed, the artificial hot or cold
region will diffuse outward from the original spot, enlarging
the radius of action in imprecisely known directions (due to
nonisotropic tissue conductance), again increasing the risk of
iatrogenic effects.
3. Load error in the human thermoregulatory control system is
~0.2-0.5˚C.865 Any thermal deviation of this magnitude or larger
from local temperatures will provoke a natural counteractive
response to restore the local temperature, including capillary
sphincter action (both vasodilator and vasoconstrictor activity),
increased sweat gland secretions, accelerated counter-current
exchanges, more rapid heart rate, or local thermogenesis.
4. Increased susceptibility to spoofing, as when a patient enters a
hot shower or bath3331, lies down on snow or on a cold concrete
surface, washes his hands and face with hot water, drinks a hot
or cold beverage, basks in the sun, and so forth. Temperatures
hot or cold enough to definitively prevent spoofing might damage
tissues if maintained for very long. This problem can be avoided
by employing an oscillating artificial thermal gradient instead
of a time-invariant source (especially across layers of highly
insulating subcutaneous fat), but at the cost of increased
required overall nanorobot sophistication to detect the oscillating
demarcation. For energy delivered to a target L ~ 1 mm from
the source in a medium of heat capacity CV and thermal
conductivity Kt, the maximum frequency that may be resolved
is νthermal ~ Kt / CV L2 ~ 0.15 Hz for aqueous tissue at 37˚C.
General positional information is also available to nanorobots
equipped with thermal sensors in the absence of any maps. For
instance, assuming the temperature of the external environment has
been measured and disseminated via the communication network
(Section 7.3), a nanorobot traveling within a microvolume of blood
can crudely infer its distance from the epidermis based on the local
blood temperature, especially when passing through the thermal
shell of the body surrounding the core. Other cues including velocity
measurements or histonavigational data may allow further refinement
of the estimate.
8.4.1.3 Low-Resolution Thermographics
Even simple thermographic maps may have great utility. If the
deviation from mean temperature to 3 significant figures (~0.01˚C
accuracy requiring ~10 bits/measurement) is resampled at ~10 Hz,
then 0.1˚C/sec gradients may be detected in each of ~105 voxels
(volume ~1 cm3
/voxel) using ~105 resident thermographicytes,
producing a 107 bit/sec dataflow. A dermal thermographic network
divided into 1 cm2 squares requires ~20,000 resident nanorobots
and produces a ~2 x 106 bit/sec whole-network dataflow at
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 241
0.01˚C accuracy (vs. 0.5-1.0˚C accuracy for traditional thermograms ).899 In either case, each thermographicyte in the network
(Section 7.3) maintains in its ~1010-bit memory (Section 7.2.6) the
entire continuously updated network map and can store ~1 hour of
historical data (~7 x 109 bits) for the whole-body thermographic
map or ~1 year of historical data (~3 x 109 bits) taken at its own
position.
Measured skin temperature can be used for macrosensing (Section
4.9). As a simple example, knowledge of average skin temperature
allows estimation of the environmental wind chill (air temperature
and velocity) and relative wind direction using the theoretical equation
given by Lampietro890 or the experimental data compiled by Mitchell
et al893 over the range of 10-50˚C and wind velocities of 1-5 m/sec,
although the presence of clothing may be a complicating factor.
Thermal patterns appearing on centimeter-resolution volume or
surface maps may be useful either for macrosensing or for the
determination of various medically relevant states. Some examples
of measurable patterns include:
1. bimodal thermal variations on the soles of the feet, while the
patient is standing on a cold concrete floor or a hot asphalt
pavement;
2. cooling of the back and seat after settling into a chair whose
surface is initially at room temperature (chair material may be
inferred from the subsequent temperature warm-up profile);3330
3. warm pattern of a hand placed on the chest while patient hears
the national anthem at a sports event;
4. cool vertical lines caused by tears running down cheeks;
5. asymmetric temperature profile caused by lying on one side or
the other, in bed or at the beach;
6. warmth or coolness on palm and thumb of one hand while
carrying a hot or cold plate of food, or grasping a cold can of
beer;
7. cool knee spots while kneeling on a cold floor;
8. comparison of facial and scalp temperatures permitting inference
of hair length and coiffure;
9. patterns of muscle warmth indicating physical activity involving
specific tendons, limbs or appendages;
10. approximate arrangement and density of clothing;3332
11. increased warmth of the sexual organs, during excitation or
tumescence, or of the skin, stomach, and liver, following a meal;
12. dangerous thermal gradients (e.g., hand placed on stove)
detected in 0.1 sec, faster than the usual ~0.2 sec human
response time; and
13. specific thermographic dermal patterns that signal the presence
of a wide variety of medical conditions such as ischemic limbs,
Raynaud’s Syndrome, cerebral apoplexy, reflex sympathetic
dystrophy, muscular injuries, abnormal joints, ankylosing
spondylitis (Pott’s disease), spinal root syndrome, osteoarthritis,
tennis elbow, osteoid osteomas, headaches, breast cancers, or
melanomas.899
Assuming exogenous positional information is available to fixed
thermographicytes, a population of these devices can constitute a
permanent monitoring network that can issue alerts and detect:
1. temperature profiles of internal or external lesions located
anywhere in the body;
2. thermal anomalies reflecting the presence of interior hematomas,
lipomas, myomas, edemas and hydromas, new fibrous deposits
or air pockets, or dental caries;
3. slowly growing tumors (e.g., by searching for localized, shallow,
but monotonic thermal gradients in the ~microkelvin/sec range
in the historical data);
4. unusual skin patterns due to defects in nervous control of the
peripheral circulation;
5. intestinal surface patterns reflecting identifiable thermal
characteristics of materials passing through the bowels, or
alterations in cell metabolism resulting from food toxins or
inflammatory reactions; or
6. alterations in the thermal behavior of individual organs at specific
times of day, under varying workloads, or over long timespans,
possibly indicating a change in functionality or general health
(measurable by taking advantage of the different thermal
characteristics of body tissues; Table 8.12).
Mobile nanorobots passing near any thermographicyte can
interrogate the device’s thermographic data library and thus may
examine all or part of the current whole-body coarse thermal map.
Similarly, historical and current data can be transmitted to medical
personnel who interrogate the network.
8.4.1.4 High-Resolution Thermographics
High-resolution maps can be assembled in designated tissue
monitoring volumes, using a network of fixed thermographicytes
whose physical positions are accurately known (Section 8.3.3). If
Ltherm = 100 microns is the mean spacing between devices, then for
a maximum transorgan temperature differential ∆T ~ 1˚C for an
organ with scale size dorgan ~ 10 cm (Table 8.9) the largest endogenously
generated temperature differential between neighboring
thermographicytes is ∆T Ltherm / dorgan ~ 10,000 microkelvins; the
smallest detectable thermal variation of ~1 microkelvin (Section
4.6.1) corresponds to a fluctuation of ~60 watts/m3 in power density
within the 0.001 mm3 monitoring volume (the equivalent power
output of ~100 mitochondria). Recording a single temperature
measurement to microkelvin accuracy requires at most ~24 bits.
Many useful configurations of such a network are readily conceived.
As a simple example, consider a monitoring unit consisting of 100
thermographicytes reporting at ~1 KHz to one centrally located
data processing nodule. The thermographicytes transmit a total of
2.4 megabits/sec to the nodule from within their 0.1 mm3 patrol
volume. A nodule with ~8 micron3 of storage tape can retain up to
~1 day’s worth of historical data generated within its monitoring
unit. Nodule nanocomputers can scan the data for a wide range of
specified anomalies and thresholds, emitting an appropriate alert
message (containing all relevant details) when one is found. In
principle, an expanding (warm) tumor could be detected* after
* Tumors which are metabolically less active are harder to detect by this means. Also, measuring heat from tumors located in organs having high metabolic activity (e.g.,
liver, kidney) is even more difficult, especially given the large caloric variations after consuming food or drink, or during normal hormonal responses, and given the relatively
high normal rate of cell division in some organs (e.g., liver, gut) that must be distinguished from abnormal tumor growth.
242 Nanomedicine • Volume I
growing to a volume of at most Ltherm
3
, a maximum pathological
cell count of ~100. Each monitoring unit consumes at most ~20,000
pW, including 100 pW/thermographicyte and 10,000 pW in the
nodule for a ~1 micron3 computational facility drawing ~1000 watts/
m3
-Hz (Section 6.5.6 (E)) and operating internally at a ~10 MHz
clock speed. For continuous surveillance of an entire organ to
microkelvin accuracy, up to ~16 million monitoring units are
required, dissipating at most ~0.3 watts, which must also be taken
into account. (The liver, for example, generates ~10 watts metabolically.)
Patients may also receive thermographicytes installed in a mobile
configuration, with the nanodevices constantly traversing the tissues
looking for anomalies, outmessaging only when such anomalies are
detected, and accurately fixing their location to within ~3 microns
at all times by interrogating a separate microtransponder positional
navigation network (Section 8.3.3). At the extreme limits of accuracy,
nanorobot waste heat may contribute significant error to thermal
measurements. A nanorobot generating waste heat Pheat = 100 pW
produces a ∆T = 10 microkelvin temperature differential over an X
= Pheat / Kt ∆T = 16-micron aqueous path; this nanorobot heat is
Table 8.12. Thermophysical Characteristics of Various Body Tissues, Organs, and Other Materials460,567,817-819,1865,2153
Thermal Heat Approx.
Conductivity Kt Capacity CV Density
Material, Organ or Tissue (watts/m-K) (MJ/m3
-K) (kg/m3
)
Skin
Very warm 2.80 3.77 1000
Normal hand 0.960 3.77 1000
Cool 0.545 3.77 1000
Upper 2 mm 0.376 3.77 1000
Cold hand 0.335 3.77 1000
Subcutaneous fat
High values 0.450 -- 901
Pure fat 0.190 1.96 850
Muscle
Living muscle 0.642 3.94 1050
Excised, fresh 0.545 3.64 1050
Skeletal muscle, living 0.372 -- 1070
Bone
Mineral -- -- 2982
Cortical 2.28 2.70 1790
Average 1.16 2.39 1500
Cancellous 0.582 2.07 1250
Blood
Water at 310 K 0.623 4.19 993.4
Plasma (Hct = 0%) at 310K 0.599 4.05 1025
Whole blood (Hct = 40%) 0.549 3.82 1050
Organs
Heart (excised, near fresh) 0.586 3.94 1060
Liver (excised, near fresh) 0.565 3.78 1050
Kidney (excised, near fresh) 0.544 4.08 1050
Abdomen core 0.544 3.89 1050
Brain (excised, near fresh) 0.528 3.86 1050
Brain (living) 0.805 -- --
Lung (excised, bovine) 0.282 2.24 603
Whole body (average) -- 4.12 1156
Air 0.009246 0.00119 1.18
Cotton fabric at 310 K 0.0796 0.0267 160
C60/C70 bulk compacts/crystals 0.1-0.4 2.3-2.5 1540-1676
Rubber 0.156 2.41 1200
Ethanol at 310 K 0.163 1.96 789
Teflon 0.399 2.20 2180
Concrete 0.934 1.93 2310
Glass, plate 1.09 1.94 2520
Ice at 249 K (-42˚C) 2.21 1.76 913
Sapphire (normal to c axis) at 310 K 2-20 2.89 3970
Stainless steel 13.8 3.68 7910
Aluminum 204 2.45 2710
Silver 405 2.59 10,500
Diamond, natural 2000 1.82 3510
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 243
dissipated by thermal conduction to below measurable levels in
~CV X2 / Kt ~ 2 milliseconds, approximating the ~1 KHz sampling
time.
8.4.2 Barographic Navigation
The internal pressure field of the human body (already briefly
summarized in Sections 4.9.1, 6.3.3, and 8.2) is as complex as the
temperature field. (Section 9.4.1 discusses the rheology of the
circulation.)361 In general, fluid pressures range from 60-150 mmHg
in the heart, arteries and arterioles; ~30 mmHg in the capillaries
and 5-20 mmHg in the veins; 4-30 mmHg in the pulmonary
artery; 9-13 mmHg in the cerebrospinal and synovial fluids; ~1.4
mmHg in the interstitial fluid between cells; and ~0.9 mmHg mean
pressure in the lymphatics, with arterial pulsations contributing
1.5-2.2 mmHg oscillations with a maximum of ~5 mmHg in the
lymphatics. (Systolic pressure may reach a maximum of ~230 mmHg
during the heaviest exercise.)
As in thermographics, simple barographic demarcation provides
a ready means for directing medical nanorobots to a desired treatment
location within the body. Simply pressing down on the surface of
the skin creates an anomalous region of elevated tissue pressure;
tapping, slapping, or palpitating the body’s surface is also detectable by
in vivo nanorobots (e.g., Section 7.4.2.1). Acoustically active catheters inserted transdermally can place a sonic beacon signal near
almost any target location. Highly focused but relatively low power
(to reduce reflection echo detection) ultrasonic columnar or planar
beams of, say, three different frequencies can be directed into the
body on various trajectories and from various sources. The tiny spot
where all three frequencies are audible at precisely equal intensity marks
the target, providing 1 mm3 localization accuracy at frequencies 1.5
MHz. Focused ultrasound surgery (FUS) and high-intensity focused
ultrasound (HIFU) may use ~2-second bursts of 1.7-MHz,
150-mm-deep focused beams at 5 x 107 watts/m2 to occlude blood
flow or destroy tumors by creating a spot of intense heat so small
that there is a boundary of only ~6 cells between destroyed tissues
and completely unharmed tissues, a ~100 micron spatial resolution.1647
As in the case of temperature fields, low-resolution and
high-resolution barographic maps can be compiled and stored by
barographicytes, then used to diagnose a wide variety of medically
relevant states in organs and throughout the body including
tumors, edemas, excess cranial pressure, general hypertension or
hypotension, swollen lymph glands, muscle spasms and the like.
Such maps are also useful in macrosensing, as for instance to help
determine if the patient is sitting,3330 standing, prone, inverted, falling,
or floating (Section 4.9.2). Blood pressure increases in patients who
are exercising, eating a meal, or emotive (e.g., angry), and decreases
in patients who are relaxing or sleeping. The typical daily readings
in a hypertensive 35-year-old male might be 150-220 mmHg systolic
and 90-140 mmHg diastolic.
However, the amplitude and timing of pressure waves in the blood
vessels permit somewhat clearer positional inferences than is possible
with thermographics, in part because the heart is such a strong,
reliable, and stably-positioned acoustic pulse generator.* Functional
hemobaric mapping thus may provide useful positional information
regarding vascular range estimates.
For example, Figure 8.29 shows the change in shape and
amplitude of the pressure wave with increasing distance downstream
from the aortic valve (where the left ventricle of the heart initially
discharges into the descending aorta). There are three features of
interest. First, each successive profile shifts to the right, suggesting
wave propagation. Second, the sharp dicrotic notch in the pressure
record (marking the closure of the aortic valve) is gradually lost in
successive profiles, a clear navigational marker of aortic range.
* In 1998, heart sounds originating from multiple sites within the four chambers of the heart, its valves and the great vessels remained difficult to analyze. Despite the close
coincidence of valve closure and high frequency components in the first heart sound (echocardiographic corroboration), the exact mechanism of sound production was poorly
understood.1302 Phonocardiograms (PCGs) are distorted during transmission through the chest wall; cardiac auscultation, traditionally used to detect a wide variety of normal
and pathological heart conditions, was still more art than science.3339-3342
Fig. 8.29. Blood pressure profiles recorded at various distances along the aorta (data from dog aorta; distances measured from beginning
of descending aorta; modified from Olson923).
244 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Third, there is a steepening and increasing of amplitude in
successive profiles, indicating a rise in peak systolic pressure with
distance from the heart. This counterintuitive increase is a dynamic
phenomenon of an elastic branching system with tapered tubes—
with steady flow in a rigid tube of similar diameter and taper,
pressure always decreases in the direction of flow unless there is
deceleration.361 Note that the mean pressure averaged over a full
heartbeat still decreases with increasing distance from the aortic
valve—by ~4 mmHg over the full length of the aorta—while the
amplitude of the systolic/diastolic pressure oscillation nearly
doubles.361 Measurements in dogs show that this peak pressure pulse
amplification process continues until about the third generation of
arterial branchings, after which both the oscillation and the mean
pressure decrease gradually downstream along the arterial tree.361
These pulse profiles can probably be resolved with sufficient accuracy
to allow a medical nanorobot equipped with appropriate pressure
sensors to fix its position along all the main trunks of the arterial
tree to within at least ~1 cm, and perhaps better.
Pressure and velocity waveforms change in different ways along
the branches of the tree,924 in part due to reflection at bifurcations,
which may allow bloodborne nanorobots to distinguish the organ
in which they currently reside. For instance, the waveforms found
in the renal and iliac arteries are quite distinct.924
Approximate position in the venous tree is readily inferred as
well. For example, mean pressure in the venules is ~18 mmHg with
fluctuations of amplitude ~3 mmHg; by the time bloodborne
nanorobots reach the upper vena cava, near the right atrium of the
heart, the mean pressure has fallen to ~2.2 mmHg with pressure
fluctuations of amplitude ~5 mmHg.361
Microvascular position can also be estimated from various local
pressure measurements.929 For instance, Figure 8.30 shows a typical
pressure-velocity distribution in arteriovenous microvessels 8-60
microns in diameter in the cat mesentery. Knowledge of mean local
pressure and flow velocity identifies vessel diameter to within ± 5
microns. Additionally, these pressure distribution profiles differ
markedly from one tissue to another (Fig. 8.31). Comparison of
the measured profile against a library of such profiles will at least
narrow the possibilities, if not produce a unique tissue identification.
Local hematocrit (the volume fraction of red cells in whole blood,
or Hct) varies as a function of microvessel diameter (Fig. 8.32).
Simple omnidirectional echolocation (Section 4.8.2) measures the
average distance to the nearest red blood cell over many samples—e.g.,
the mean center-to-center distance between red cells is ~9.8
microns at Hct 10%, ~6.8 microns at Hct 30%. An acoustic test
pulse travels ~1.5 microns in 1 nanosec, hence Hct 10% and Hct
12.7% are distinguishable using one round-trip measurement,
allowing a medical nanorobot to estimate the local microvessel
diameter to within approximately ± 10 microns. Given the scatter
in the data, multiple measurements should improve the accuracy of
the estimate.
Maps of mechanical properties such as strain fields in tissues can
also provide useful navigational information but will be more difficult
for individual nanorobots to employ directly. Magnetic resonance
elastography (MRE) has already been used experimentally to map
the shear modulus field of a porcine kidney using shear wave excitation
at 200-400 Hz.928 Shear waves with displacements under 100 nm
were readily observed, and it is believed the technique may be useful in
mapping other viscoelastic parameters such as attenuation and
dispersion, allowing more detailed tissue characterization.
Elastographic parameters are highly variable in time as well as space.
For example, the viscoelasticity of cervical mucus secretions swings
widely over the course of the menstrual cycle, with a major feature
occurring at mid-period near ovulation time,922 mirroring the
temperature changes (Section 8.4.1.1)
8.4.3 Chemographic Navigation
The human body is a cauldron of chemical complexity. Of
particular interest to us here are those extracellularly occurring
chemical species reliably associated with specific locations, functions,
or processes that might be useful in navigation. As trivial examples,
high concentrations of hormones or neuropeptides are found in the
endocrine glands or in the nerve tissues; lactic acid is produced in
muscles driven anaerobically; uric acid is heavily concentrated in
urine in the bladder (although high blood levels may indicate gout);
capillary lymph is more watery than thoracic lymph, which in turn
is far richer in histaminase than cervical duct lymph (Section 8.2.1.3).
As with thermal and pressure markers, crude chemical demarcation
markers may be employed to direct medical nanorobots to particular
locations. Such markers may include injected chemical plumes, time
release implants, remote-triggered releasers (e.g., pressure-release
multi-chemical-bearing tattoos), and tissue-coded markers (analogous
to radiolabeled iodine concentrating in the thyroid gland, alkali metal
ions seeking out bone, or cancer-cell-targeted light-sensitive drug
molecules in photodynamic therapy)—all of which may establish
useful localized chemical gradients. The principle difficulty for natural
signal molecules is signal persistence, which may be relatively brief
unless continuous broadcast and artificial (nonabsorbable) signal
molecules are employed. Continuous broadcast creates a detection
sphere of maximum radius Rmax around the broadcast emission point
(Section 7.2.1.5). Use of artificial non-biodegradable molecules
maximizes the signal/noise ratio. Diffusion causes small molecules
to drift ~1 cell width in ~1 second, or ~1 mm in ~1000 seconds
(Section 3.2 and Table 3.4); bulk flow microconvection and increased
effective diffusivity due to natural stirring (Section 3.2.2) further
limit positional precision.
Use of chemical beacons for chemonavigational triangulation is
not efficient over large distances, since the required volume of signal
Fig. 8.30. Pressure-velocity distribution in microvasculature (data
from cat mesentery; each point represents the average value of 3-5
measurements; modified from Zweifach and Lipowsky925).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 245
molecules to the limit of nanodevice rotation during a Brownian
motion-limited measurement time (Section 3.2.1). A pair of
10-probe sensors taking measurements every ~1 millisec (concentration differential ∆c / c ~ 20% over the full nanomedically-relevant
range of Kd = 10-4 to 10-13 molecules/nm3
; Section 4.2.1) can
resolve ∆α ~ 3˚ of arc (Eqn. 3.2), or two chemical point-emitters
separated by Xpath sin(∆α) ~ 1 micron at a range of Xpath ~ 20
microns (~1 cell width) from the nanorobot.
Chemonavigation can also provide useful positional information.
For example, glucose absorption in the jejunum establishes chemical
gradients both in the radial and axial directions in the lumen and
also across the surface of the small intestine (Section 8.2.3). If chyme
leaving the duodenum starts with 1% glucose concentration and
exits the upper jejunum at 0.01% concentration ~50 cm downstream,
then the same 10-probe chemical sensor as above can measure 25
distinguishable glucose levels as a function of distance from the
pylorus. This allows jejunal position to be estimated to within ~2
cm using glucose concentration alone.
Chemical navigation in the gut may incur significant positional
uncertainties due to the large chemical variation of ingested foodstuffs,
the generation and transport of gases, the volume and character of
liquids consumed with the food, the state of mind (and bowel
peristalsis) of the patient, the presence of biochemistry-altering
disorders, and other factors. On the other hand, the results of measurements of nutrient levels in the stomach and duodenum may be
broadcast downstream to jejunal nanorobots, allowing real-time
assessment of the efficiency of digestive processes and thus reducing
positional uncertainties. Similar gradients allow positional
chemonavigation in gland ducts such as the salivary and pancreatic
ducts.
Sulfate groups are more numerous on the surfaces of the rabbit
aortic arch and carotid than on the surfaces of the rest of the systemic
arteries, and post-staining fluorescence intensity (measuring abundance
of sialyl groups in the endothelial glycocalyx) is 1.65 times higher in the
carotid than in the aorta.3164 In cyto chemonavigation is possible as
well. For example, intracellular diffusion gradients of O2 and ATP that
Fig. 8.31. Micropressure distribution profile while passing through two different tissues (data from mesentery and skeletal muscle of the
cat; number of measurements in parentheses; central blood pressure (CBP) is average central arterial pressure from all experiments; modified
from Fronek and Zweifach926).
Fig. 8.32. Hematocrit distribution profile in microvasculature as a
function of vessel diameter (data from cat mesentery; modified from
Lipowsky, Usami, and Chien927).
chemical rises as the cube of the range. However, chemical localization
may be moderately useful in close quarters. For instance, a
micron-size nanorobot equipped with two antipodal chemical
sensors can angularly resolve two periodic sources of dissimilar signal
246 Nanomedicine • Volume I
appear under some conditions3068 could be useful for detecting the
distribution and clustering of mitochondria.
Detailed chemomapping of individual patients may allow
customization of standardized human chemographic profiles, e.g.,
to identify problem areas. Chemographicytes may assist in the
mapping process at up to ~KHz sampling frequencies (Section
8.5.2.1; see also Chapter 19). For instance, regions of hypoxia
develop in all solid tumors where rapidly dividing cells are supplied
by inadequate or poorly developed vasculature. A continuously
updated tissue oxygenation map allows recognition of growing hypoxic
regions, permitting prompt detection of nascent tumors, myocardial
and cerebral ischemia, cardiorespiratory failure, and rheumatoid
arthritis (e.g., loss of fluids that provide joint oxygenation). Similarly, a
whole-body map of the concentration of intracellularly sampled
telomerase (or associated proteins such as TRF1/TRF2,3051,3052 Ku,
and tankyrase,3053 or even telomerase mRNA levels) may provide a
good first-cut toward a whole-body late-stage cancer map,* since
85%-90% of all primary tumors display this biochemical marker.3058
Cancer cells also display above-normal concentrations of β1 integrins,
survivin, sialidase-sensitive cancer mucins and leptin receptors such
as galectin-3, and below-normal concentrations of β4 integrins. Other
examples include GM2 ganglioside, a glycolipid present on the surface
of ~95% of melanoma cells, with the carbohydrate portion of the
molecule conveniently jutting out on the extracellular side of the
melanoma cell membrane.1403 GM2 and another ganglioside, GD2,
are expressed in several types of cancer cells including small-cell
lung, colon, and gastric cancer, sarcoma, lymphoma, and neuroblastoma.1403 Numerous specific markers of disease (an emerging
field known as molecular epidemiology)1112 are available for detection
and mapping by nanorobots.
Another example is the chemographic mapping of organs. In
the liver, hepatocytes located close to the portal vein (acinal Zone 1;
Figure 8.26A) are bathed in blood that is comparatively rich in oxygen
and nutrients, with only minimum exposure to metabolic waste
products. In Zone 2, the blood is less fresh and wastes are more
plentiful. In Zone 3, which extends to the central vein, the blood
has little oxygen or nutrients but the highest concentration of
metabolites.936 Metabolic and exocrine secretory activity creates
distinct chemical and thermal gradients, clearly defining each lobule.
This allows medical nanorobots to navigate between lobules by simply
counting the number of lobules traversed, and to navigate within a
chosen lobule by gradient averaging. Changes in measured gradients
may evidence a recent ingestion of alcohol or other toxins, or may
record the progression of hypoxia or cirrhosis which invariably begins
in Zone 3.936
Chemical localization to specific organs or tissues appears practical
(Sections 8.2.5 and 8.5.2.2), as does chemical macrosensing of
systemic states. For instance, a rise in serum adrenalin accompanied by
surges in lactic acid production or oxygen consumption in the lower
extremities might raise the reasonable inference that the patient is
panicky and possibly fleeing from something that may be chasing
him. Measurement of the concentration of thiocyanate in salivary
secretions can distinguish smokers (~9 x 10-3 gm/cm3
) from nonsmokers (~2 x 10-3 gm/cm3
).943 Measurement of leptin concentrations
(a hormone secreted by fat cells) in the blood allows nanorobots to
estimate the total amount of fat currently stored in the body, relative to
the normal baseline of a given person.3265
Chemical tracking is also feasible. For example, a “bacterium
moves through the water (or the liquid interior of your body) in a
greasy cloud of its own waste products,”2973 due to the excretion of
metabolic byproducts through transmembrane pores. Such microbial
exhaust plumes might plausibly be detectable for distances up to
~100-1000 microns downstream, depending upon bacterial emissions,
local fluid flow rates and other factors (Section 7.2.1), possibly
permitting tracking and interception by medical nanorobots.
Interestingly, quorum sensing among bacteria enables some microbes
to eavesdrop on the chemical communications of other species.3236
Developing embryos demonstrate a sophisticated “biological
positioning system” by which each cell determines its location relative
to other cells to eventually produce the appropriate tissue, organ, or
nerve. For example, members of the “Wnt” and “Hedgehog”
families of signaling proteins help cells (in developing limbs and
organs) to distinguish up from down. As another example, neuron
migrations within the developing embryo are thought to be guided
by chemical signposts such as the proteins reelin (released near the
destinations of migrating neurons), mDab1 (which may be a docking
protein activated by reelin),949 and the homeodomain proteins
DLX-1 and DLX-2.950 Neuroblast cells that divide in the
subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle in the brain of adult mice
migrate a distance of ~3-5 mm to the olfactory bulb; these migrating
neuroblasts remain organized in chains until they reach the core of
the olfactory bulb, after which they separate and migrate radially as
individual cells to more peripheral layers, then halt and differentiate
into neurons.947 During this process, the neural precursors are not
guided by radial glial or axonal fibers, suggesting chemonavigational
guidance here too. Similarly, developing neurons shoot out axons
whose tips are steered to their destinations by an array of guidance
molecules that are fixed on cell surfaces, or are located within the
extracellular matrix, or are secreted by the axon’s targets—such as
the netrins (a chemoattractant group of proteins) and the
semiphorins such as collapsin (a chemorepellant protein).951,1055
There is also a chemical “area code” 1495 that is used for cell localization
during extravasation of leukocytes from blood vessels (Section
9.4.4.1). Medical nanorobots can be programmed to follow and to
interpret any such positional chemical signposts normally used by
motile cells.
Chemonavigation may also be aided by the detection of
isozymes—physically distinct forms displaying the same catalytic
activity that may be present in different tissues of the same organism,
in different cell types, or in different subcellular compartments in a
human being. Isozymes are common in the sera and tissues of all
vertebrates, insects, plants, and unicellular organisms. They are
commonly used in clinical diagnosis, as, for instance, to distinguish
normal serum and serum from patients with a myocardial infarct or
with liver disease, using a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) electropherogram,996,3343-3348 although more recently the utility of isoenzymes in some clinical applications has been questioned.3349,3350
8.4.4 Microbiotagraphics
While high-speed nanomedical prophylactic measures against
pathogens will be readily available (e.g., Section 10.4 and Chapter
19), in some cases the physician may wish to obtain an infection
map before beginning treatment. It may also be useful to prepare
maps of particular symbiotic, commensal, or parasitic bacterial species,
* Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein enzyme found principally in the cell nucleus. Telomerase is present in ciliated protozoa in concentrations of ~0.004-1 enzyme molecule
per telomere;3054,3055 with 92 chromosome-tip telomeres, telomerase-active human cell nuclei may contain only 1-100 copies of the enzyme. About 10% of human cancer cells
maintain their telomeres without telomerase.3056 Additionally, while telomerase is not expressed in most human somatic tissues,3057,3058 certain normal human stem cells and
germline populations are telomerase positive3058-3062 and telomerase has been reported in normal human white blood cells and in some noncancerous liver diseases;3063-3065 stem
cells have low but detectable telomerase activity but continue to exhibit telomere shortening throughout life,3060 hence telomerase expression per se is not oncogenic.3066
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 247
or native mobile cellular elements, in the human body, whether for
scientific or for diagnostic purposes.
For example, leukocytes and macrophages are readily recognized
(Section 8.5.2.2) and could be statistically sampled to produce a
crude whole-body leukographic map. A fleet of 2 trillion mapping
nanorobots evenly distributed throughout a 0.1 m3 body volume
gives each nanorobot a patrol volume of 50,000 micron3
 (~1 capillary
volume). At 310 K, a 1-micron nanorobot of normal density has an
average thermal velocity of ~500 microns/sec (Eqn. 3.3). Assuming
a cross-sectional area of ~1 micron2
, in 1 second a motile device
traveling at this speed may trace out a nonrepeating zigzag path
~500 microns in length, or ~1% of its patrol volume, even while
diffusing an additional radial distance of only ∆X ~ 1 micron (Eqn.
3.1). During its zigzag course, the device may collide at least once
with ~1% of the motile body cells or microbiota present within the
patrol volume. If ~10 collisions are required to ensure a positive
identification of a cellular coat, then ~0.1% of the entire target cell
population present in the patient’s body may be physically sampled,
positively identified, affirmatively counted, and directly associated
with a specific map voxel in ~1 sec—a sufficient statistical sample
for most purposes, even given the likelihood of substantial
double-counting. A whole-body white-cell-count map to ~1 cm3
voxel resolution requires ~106 bits to describe and may be retrieved
by the physician in 1 sec using an in vivo mobile acoustic communication network; a ~1 mm3 resolution map (~109 bits) fine
enough to discover even the smallest macroscale infection site
requires ~100-1000 seconds to outmessage in this manner. A
sequence of readouts at regular intervals provides a clear strategic
overview of the developing infection—some bacterial infections
cause a selective increase in neutrophils, while infections with some
protozoa and other parasites cause a selective increase in eosinophils.531
Whole-body vascular (e.g., bloodstream only) surveys of red cells,
white cells, platelets or pathogens will proceed ~10 times faster
using a nanorobot fleet of similar number density, owing to the
reduced search volume, though at the cost of slightly increased
onboard computational complexity needed to compensate for the
moving reference frame.
Discussion of possible protein coat marker modifications that
bacteria or other pathogens might evolve in a nanomedical
technology-rich treatment environment as a defensive tactic is
deferred to Chapter 17.
8.5 Cytonavigation
Cytonavigation is the study of navigation in and around the
individual cell. The topic is large and the present work can only
scratch the surface. After a brief cytometric overview (Section 8.5.1),
the discussion here addresses four important issues—distinguishing
whether an encountered cell is self or nonself (Section 8.5.2.1),
determining the exact cell type of an encountered cell (Section
8.5.2.2), the significant features and landmarks inside living cells,
called cytography (Section 8.5.3), and special considerations involved
in navigating the cellular nucleus, called nucleography (Section
8.5.4). Issues relating to membrane penetration and cell entry by
medical nanorobots are largely deferred to Section 9.4.5.
8.5.1 Cytometrics
How many cells are there in the human body? Serious estimates
vary from a low of 10 trillion312,931,2185 up to 50 trillion,870 75
trillion,71,863 and even 100 trillion.836,932,938,2022 The numbers show
considerable spread because some authors refer only to tissue cells
while others may refer to all cells physically present, both native
and foreign.
The single most common native cell in the human body is the
red blood cell (RBC), or erythrocyte. The average adult male carries
~5.2 x 109 RBCs/cm3 (Appendix B) in his ~5400 cm3 blood volume
(Table 8.1), giving ~28.1 trillion RBCs. The spleen has an additional
~70 cm3 of noncirculating RBC storage volume, giving another 0.4
trillion RBCs for a total of ~28.5 trillion RBCs in the body. Also
confined to the bloodstream are a median ~2.5 x 108 platelets/cm3
,
~7.0 x 106
/cm3 leukocytes including neutrophils, eosinophils,
basophils, lymphocytes and monocytes (Appendix B), plus
another ~0.7 trillion platelets sequestered in a circulation-accessible
pool in the spleen,2122 giving ~2.1 trillion platelet cells in the human
body and a white cell count of 0.4 trillion in the blood. There are
also ~0.7 trillion lymphocytes in the lymphatic system (Table 8.5)
and ~0.2 trillion macrophages and other reticuloendothelial (mononuclear phagocyte) cells throughout the human tissues.743Thus there
are ~31.5 trillion native nontissue cells in the human body. There are
also ~40 trillion foreign single-celled bacteria inhabiting the
human colon, assuming ~35% of the ~340 cm3 colorectal contents
are bacteria each averaging ~1.8 microns in diameter.
As for tissue cells, a 70 kg adult male reference body includes
~28.8 kg of body cell mass (BCM), defined as the amount of body
tissue calculated to contain potassium at a concentration of 120
mEq (millimole)/kg.817 This figure is favored over the LBM (lean
body mass) because BCM defines the component of body composition
that contains the oxygen-containing, potassium-rich,
glucose-oxidizing, work-performing tissue and contains all cellular
elements concerned with respiration, physical and chemical work,
and mitotic activity.
Most human cells fall within a size range of 2-120 microns.866
Platelets are ~2 microns, red cells ~3 microns x ~8 microns, neutrophils ~8-10 microns, lymphocytes ~6-12 microns in size, exocrine
cells ~10 microns, fibroblasts 10-15 microns, osteocytes ~10-20
microns including processes, chondrocytes and liver cells ~20
microns, goblet and ciliated cells ~50 microns long and 5-10
microns wide, macrophages at ~20-80 microns, hematopoietic stem
cells ~30-40 microns, and adipocytes filled with stored lipid are
typically 70-120 microns in diameter (but may be up to five times
larger in very obese people).935-936 Neurons vary enormously in size
and shape, their bodies ranging from 4-120 microns in diameter
with axonal processes varying between ~0.1-20 microns in diameter
and ranging in length from a few microns up to ~1 meter;799 muscle
cells (~30% of all tissue cells) also vary from 10-100 microns in
diameter and may run up to ~50 cm in length. However, the
“average” tissue cell, if such a thing may be said to exist, is probably
~20 microns in diameter,313 weighing ~10 nanograms.
Since the reference human has a mean density of 1064 kg/m3
excluding bone minerals,817 a BCM of 28.8 kg makes ~0.027 m3 of
cells; taking 8000 micron3 per cell gives a total of ~3.4 trillion tissue
cells. Thus the human body contains ~35 trillion native cells, of
which only ~10% are tissue cells, plus ~40 trillion foreign (mostly
bacterial) cells in the colon for a grand total of 75 trillion cells. The
number of tissue cells comprising each organ listed in Table 8.9
may be crudely estimated by multiplying tissue volume by the mean
tissue cellular number density, or ~125 million cells/cm3
.
8.5.2 Cytoidentification
Before entering and navigating a cell, a medical nanorobot must
first determine whether the cell belongs to the patient or is a foreign
cell (Section 8.5.2.1). The nanorobot must also determine which
type of cell it has encountered, either to verify its location in a
desired target organ or tissue, or to ensure that a targeted cell type
has been found (Section 8.5.2.2). Fortunately, the plasma membrane
248 Nanomedicine • Volume I
(the cell’s outermost coat; Section 8.5.3.2) is an open book for
nanodevices equipped to read it.
8.5.2.1 Identification of Self
The cytochemical distinction between self and nonself is mediated
by the histocompatibility molecules.939,953-955,997 These antigens are
genetically coded in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC),
a cluster of ~28 genes located on chromosome 6 and comprising
~0.1% of the entire human genome. There are three broad classes
(I, II, and III) of MHC genes that encode self antigens. The major
function of the MHC-I and MHC-II molecules439 is the presentation
of antigenic peptide fragments, derived from internal (MHC-I) or
external (MHC-II) foreign proteins, to the immune system. It is
the combination of an MHC molecule plus a foreign peptide fragment
that appears antigenic to the immune system. (See Chapter 15.)
Most important are the MHC Class I molecules—glycoproteins
encoded by several separate genetic loci which comprise the HLA
(histocompatibility locus antigens, formerly “human leukocyte
antigens”) complex. The three classical loci within the HLA complex
are called HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C. Essentially all adult nucleated
cells in the human body (including white cells but excluding cells
in the nervous system and cells of some tumors) display the classical MHC molecules of the A, B, and C regions on their surfaces in
varying amounts.* Class I glycoproteins account for up to 1% of
the total protein of the plasma membrane.939 Figure 8.33 shows
the structure and orientation of a Class I MHC glycoprotein. Each
MHC Class I molecule has two parts. The first part is a long folded
glycosylated polypeptide chain of molecular weight ~45,000 daltons
(~340 residues). This chain has a short (~30 residue) hydrophilic
tail inside the cell and a ~40 residue hydrophobic transmembrane
segment. The extracellular portion has three ~90-residue segments
designated α1, α2, and α3 with intrasegment disulfide bridges.
Alloantigenic sites (carrying determinants specific to each individual)
are located primarily in the α1 domain and to a lesser extent in the
α2 domain, and there is a carbohydrate unit attached to the α2
domain. The α3 domain is relatively invariant. The second part of
the MHC Class I molecule is a nonglycosylated 96-residue peptide
called β2-microglobulin, of molecular weight ~12,000 daltons, which
is noncovalently bound to the α3 domain of the longer glycosylated
chain nearest the outer surface of the cell membrane.
β2-microglobulin is not part of the active antigenic site of the HLA
molecule but is essential for the expression of specificity.
MHC Class II molecules are also glycosylated integral membrane
proteins (Fig. 8.34). These proteins are coded by at least six
expressed genes located in the D region of the MHC cluster, each
of which encodes either a ~34,000-dalton α chain or a
~28,000-dalton β chain. Each MHC Class II polypeptide consists
of two external 90-residue domains, a 30-residue transmembrane
domain, and a cytoplasmic domain with 10-15 amino acids. There
are four serologically-determined Class II subtypes: HLA-DR and
HLA-D (one α and several β chains), HLA-DQ (one α and one β
chain), and HLA-DP (at least one α and one β chain). Each Class
II glycoprotein molecule consists of at least two of these transmembrane polypeptide chains bound together noncovalently. Only the
shorter β chains contain the alloantigenic sites, and both chains
have carbohydrate units.955 MHC Class II molecules are less widely
distributed than those of Class I, being found primarily on dendritic
cells, glial cells in the brain, some epithelial and endothelial cells
(e.g., Langerhans cells in the epidermis), monocytes, macrophages
(including tissue macrophages such as the Kupffer cells of the liver),
melanoma cells, activated (but not resting) T cells, and most B lymphocytes.953,955 Other cells may be induced to express MHC Class
II proteins when exposed to γ interferon.956 Most parenchymal cells
do not express MHC Class II molecules.953
Fig. 8.33. Stucture and orientation of an MHC Class I glycoprotein
molecule (modified from Becker and Deamer939).
* Classical HLA tissue typing relied solely upon observations of cytotoxic reactions of human alloantisera with live lymphocytes. By 1998 it was apparent that this approach
fails to distinguish all HLA alleles, and typing based on nucleotide sequences had begun to replace serological methods.1028
Fig. 8.34. Structure and orientation of an MHC Class II glycoprotein
molecule (modified from Becker and Deamer939).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 249
MHC Class III genes encode the ~20 proteins that comprise the
complement system, including Bf, C2, C4A and C4B. These are
functionally related in that they are each involved in the activation of
the C3 component (Chapter 15). They allow human cell membranes
to be distinguished from nonhuman (e.g., bacterial) membranes, a
crude form of self identification, but are nonspecific and thus play
no role in distinguishing the cells of one patient from those of
another.
The >3.8 megabase gene locus of the MHC is the most polymorphic (having alternative types) in the human genome; the number
of observed MHC (HLA) types appears to be near the optimum
number based on evolutionary simulation experiments using a cellular
automaton model of antigen-lymphocyte interactions.958Table 8.13
summarizes classical serological and modern nucleotide-based HLA
specificities that were recognized as of 1998. (Not shown are several
“public antigens” such as HLA-DRw52 and DRw53 which, like
MHC Class III proteins, are essentially nonspecific.) The
HLA-uniqueness of an individual patient can only be estimated
because the specificities do not occur with equal probability. For
example, 16% of the human population has HLA-A1 but only 10%
have HLA-B8.955 As an additional complication, the specificities
are not strictly independent—given the above probabilities, the combination A1B8 should occur with a frequency of 1.6%, but the
actual observed frequency is 8.8%.955 Members of the same
geneological family are also far more likely to have matching MHC
Class II proteins than randomly selected unrelated individuals. Subject
to these provisos, the existence of ~500 million distinct classical
HLA combinations originally seemed to imply that only ~10 people
in a worldwide population of 5 billion people shared exactly the
same self-molecules, making each person literally “one in a billion.”
However, based on nucleotide sequencing, as of 1998 there were
estimated to be >1016 known combinations, making each person
quite histocompatibility-unique.
MHC Class I and Class II self-molecules are manufactured in
the rough endoplasmic reticulum (Section 8.5.3.5) and are then
delivered to the plasma membrane (Section 8.5.3.2) for presentation
to the extracellular environment. A typical cell may have
15,000-30,000 Class I molecules (~10-20/micron2
) at its surface; a
Table 8.13. Recognized HLA Specificities
A. Specificities Based on Classical Serological Alloantisera Typing956
Class I Proteins Class II Proteins
HLA-A HLA-B HLA-C HLA-D HLA-DR HLA-DQ HLA-DP
A1 A28 B5 B38 B5102 B65 Cw1 Dw1 Dw14 DR1 DR12 DQ1 DPw1
A2 A29 B7 B39 B5103 B67 Cw2 Dw2 Dw15 DR103 DR13 DQ2 DPw2
A203 A30 B703 B3901 B52 B70 Cw3 Dw3 Dw16 DR2 DR14 DQ3 DPw3
A210 A31 B8 B3902 B53 B71 Cw4 Dw4 Dw17 DR3 DR1403 DQ4 DPw4
A3 A32 B12 B40 B54 B72 Cw5 Dw5 Dw18 DR4 DR1404 DQ5 DPw5
A9 A33 B13 B41 B55 B73 Cw6 Dw6 Dw19 DR5 DR15 DQ6 DPw6
A10 A34 B14 B42 B56 B75 Cw7 Dw7 Dw20 DR6 DR16 DQ7
A11 A36 B15 B44 B57 B76 Cw8 Dw8 Dw21 DR7 DR17 DQ8
A19 A43 B16 B45 B58 B77 Cw9 Dw9 Dw22 DR8 DR18 DQ9
A23 A66 B17 B46 B59 B7801 Cw10 Dw10 Dw23 DR9 DR51
A24 A68 B18 B47 B60 Dw11 Dw24 DR10 DR52
A25 A69 B22 B48 B61 Bw4 Dw12 Dw25 DR11 DR53
A26 A74 B27 B49 B62 Bw6 Dw13 Dw26
B35 B50 B63
B37 B51 B64
Total Number of Protein Types = 26 + 57 + 10 + 26 + 24 + 9 + 6 = 158 types
Total Number of Combinations = 26 x 57 x 10 x 26 x 24 x 9 x 6 = 499,374,720 combinations
B. Specificities Based on Modern Nucleotide Sequence Typing1028
HLA Class I Alleles HLA Class II Alleles
Number of Number of Number of Number of
Locus of Alleles Locus of Alleles Locus of Alleles Locus of Alleles
HLA-A 67 HLA-F 1 HLA-DRA 2 HLA-DPA 8
HLA-B 149 HLA-G 6 HLA-DRB 179 HLA-DPB 69
HLA-C 39 HLA-DQA 18 HLA-DMA 4
HLA-E 5 HLA-DQB 29 HLA-DMB 5
Total: 266 Total: 314
Number of Class I sets = 11,680,110 six-allele sets
Number of Class II sets = 2,063,111,040 eight-allele sets
Total Number of Combinations = 2.41 x 1016 fourteen-allele combinations
250 Nanomedicine • Volume I
cell expressing Class II proteins may display 50,000-500,000 Class
II molecules (~40-400/micron2
) at its surface.439,3453 A nanorobot
chemotactic sensor pad (with appropriate reversible binding sites;
Section 4.2.8) measuring 50-300 nm in diameter pressed against a
cell surface will overlay at least one of each class of self-molecule.
Vesicle-transported proteins (like MHC proteins) have an estimated
lateral diffusion coefficient in the cell plasma membrane of ~2 x 10-14
m2
/sec,531 so an MHC molecule (assumed diameter ~10 nm)
experiences an effective absolute viscosity of ηantigen ~ 2.3 kg/m-sec
(Eqn. 3.5) and thus migrates across the plasma membrane surface
under the sensor pad from center to periphery of the sensor pad in
20-600 millisec (vs. 0.01-0.5 millisec for phospholipid molecules
in the membrane; Eqn. 3.1), allowing a single binding event and
hence a detection in much less than a second.
Consider a chemotactic sensor pad of area Apad overlaying Nantigen
antigen molecules, comprising an array of Nsensor chemosensors each
of area Asensor. If a single detection event requires τ = 3 π ηantigen
Rantigen ∆X2 / kT seconds (Eqn. 3.1) where ∆X is the mean antigen
migration distance in the cell membrane, then the time needed to
measure Nspec specificities assuming a minimum of Nencounter contact
events to ensure a binding event is tmeas = τ (Nspec Nencounter / Nsensor).
Since Nsensor = Apad / Asensor and ∆X2 = Asensor Nspec / Nantigen, then:

t
3 R N N A
A N kT meas (sec) antigen antigen encounter spec
2
sensor
2
pad antigen
= π η
{Eqn. 8.5}
Taking Rantigen = 5 nm, Nencounter = 10, Asensor = 100 nm2
, Apad =
90,000 nm2
, Nantigen = 1, and T = 310 K, then tmeas ~ (3 x 10-5)
Nspec2
. A nanorobot searching for a particular set of 7 HLA proteins
(Nspec = 7) thus requires tmeas ~ 0.001 sec to make the self/nonself
determination for a particular cell membrane it has encountered. A
nanorobot seeking to determine the HLA type of the membrane
(e.g., in mapping mode) must in the worst case search all (266 +
314 =) 580 HLA protein types (Nspec = 580), requiring at most tmeas
~ 10 sec.
The principal exceptions to the MHC system are the red blood
cells, the most numerous native cells in the human body (Section
8.5.1). Red cells do not express HLA proteins. Rather, the erythrocyte
surface expresses a complex set of at least 22 blood group systems
and 7 antigen collections, as listed in Table 8.14, plus 47 additional
high-prevalence (public) and low-prevalence (private) antigens not
associated with known systems or collections, also grouped into
numbered series (not shown in the table).957 Some of these antigen
systems are carbohydrates, like the familiar ABO system, which is
coded by genes located on chromosome 9; others are nonglycosylated
proteins, glycoproteins or glycosphingolipids. Each system or
collection is expressed on every erythrocyte surface, so an exhaustive
assay of all 30+ antigen systems allows at least ~1019 different
combinations to be distinguished. Most combinations are extremely
rare, so the practical net specificity of the entire blood group set is
considerably less in the human population, though probably still
much higher than the HLA system.
ABO is the best-known blood group system. Erythrocytes are
typed as A, B, AB, or O, the latter indicating a lack of expression of
either A or B. The H antigen is the precursor of A and B (Fig. 8.35)
and is found on all red cell surfaces (up to ~1.7 x 106 antigens/RBC, or
~18,000/micron2
) except those of patients with the rare Oh Bombay
or H-null phenotype. Because H is a precursor of A and B, type O
erythrocytes have more H antigen than A or B erythrocytes, which in
turn have more H antigen than AB erythrocytes (which express both
A and B antigens). The number of A and B antigens on the red cell
surface ranges from 1-2 x 106 (~10,000-20,000/micron2
); in 75%
of Type A individuals, “double-length” A antigens are also present
(~500/micron2
). MNSs factor antigens range from ~2700-5400/
micron2
, Rh factor antigens ~100-300/micron2
, Lewis factor antigens
~30/micron2
, and so forth. Again assuming a ~(300 nm)2 chemotactic
sensor pad, from Eqn. 8.5 a nanorobot searching for a particular set
of ~30 blood group antigens (Nspec = 30) requires tmeas ~ 0.03 sec to
make the self/nonself determination for a particular red cell membrane
it has encountered. A nanorobot seeking to determine the complete
blood group type of the membrane (e.g., in mapping mode) must
in the worst case search all 254 known blood antigen types (Nspec =
254), requiring at most tmeas ~ 2 sec.
Direct detection of blood group antigens, or of antibodies to
blood group antigens in body fluids, permits at least partial
self-recognition by bloodborne nanorobots without the need for
any direct cell contact, which may be useful in establishing theater
protocols (Chapter 12). ABH, Lewis, I and P blood group antigens
are found in blood plasma, and serum IgM-class antibodies associated
with the carbohydrate antigens of the ABO, Lewis, and P blood
group systems are almost universal. Anti-M and anti-N are common,
anti-Sda is found in 1-2% of normal people, and anti-Vw or anti-Wra
is found in ~1% of patients.960 In persons who previously have been
Fig. 8.35. Structure of ABO blood system red cell surface carbohydrate
antigens (modified from Cunningham959).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 251
Table 8.14. Blood Group Systems and Antigen Collections Recognized in 1997957
Total # of Common Common % # of Antigen
Conventional Name Antigens Antigens Phenotypes Frequency Sites/RBC
Blood group systems:
ABO 4 A A 40% ABO: 1-2 x 106
B B 11% H: 1.7 x 106
AB 4%
H O 45%
Rh 47 D R1 DCe 42% D: 1 x 103
C,c,CW r dce 37% R2R2: 15-33 x 103
E,e R2 DcE 14% R1R1: 14-19 x 103
f(ce) R0 Dce 4% R0r: 12-20 x 103
V(ceS
) r’dCe 2% R1r: 9-14 x 103
r” dcE 1% cc: 70-85 x 103
Rz DCE rare Cc: 37-53 x 103
r
y
dCE rare ee: 18-24 x 103
Ee: 13-14 x 103
MNSs 37 M M+N- 28% MN: 5 x 105
N M+N+ 50% Ss: 2.5 x 105
S M-N+ 22%
s S+s- 11%
U S+s+ 44%
S-s+ 45%
S-s-U- <1%
P 1P1 Pk
+P+P1+(P1) 79%
P Pk
+P+P1-(P2) 21%
Pk Pk
-P-P1-(p) rare
Pk
+P-P1+(PL
k
) more rare
Pk
+P-P1-(P2
k
) most rare
Lewis 3 Lea Le(a+b-) 22% Lea
: 3 x 103
Leb Le(a-b+) 72%
Le(a-b-) 6%
Le(a+b+) rare
Kell 21 K K-k+ 91% 2-6 x 103
k K+k+ 8.8%
Kpa K+k- 0.2%
Kpb Kp(a-b+) 97.7%
Jsa Kp(a+b+) 2.3%
Jsb Kp(a+b-) rare
Js(a-b+) 100%
Js(a+b+) rare
Js(a+b-) very rare
Duffy 6 Fya Fy(a+b-)Fy3+ 17% Fya
: 7-13 x 103
Fyb Fy(a+b+)Fy3+ 49%
Fy3 Fy(a-b+)Fy3+ 34%
Fy4 Fy(a-b-)Fy3-4+ rare
Fy(a-b-)Fy3-4- very rare
Kidd 3 Jka Jk(a+b-)Jk3+ 28% Jka
Jka
: 14 x 103
Jkb Jk(a+b+)Jk3+ 49%
Jk3 Jk(a-b+)Jk3+ 23%
Jk(a-b-)Jk3- very rare
Lutheran 18 Lua Lu(a-b-)Lu3+ 0.15% Lub
: 0.8-4 x 103
Lub Lu(a+b+)Lu3+ 7.5%
Lu3 Lu(a+b-)Lu3+ 92.3%
Lu(a-b-)Lu3- very rare
Diego 2
Cartwright 2
Xg 1
Scianna 3
Dombrock 5
Coulton 3
LW 3
Chido/Rogers 9
H 1
Kx 1
Gerbich 7
Cromer 10
Knops 5
252 Nanomedicine • Volume I
pregnant or transfused, 0.16-0.56% have anti-D (Rh group) and
0.14-0.60% have anti-E and anti-C (Rh system), anti-K and anti-Fya
,
and several other antibodies in serum.960 Body secretions contain
ABH, I and Lewis antigen but no P system antigens; Sda antigen is
found in most body secretions, with the greatest concentration in
the urine.960
Other partial exceptions to the MHC system are the
keratinocytes, smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts, which do not
constitutively express HLA Class II molecules.967 As a result, foreign
fibroblasts cannot induce the generation of required helper T cells
and thus stimulate no rejection response when transplanted between
hosts.
8.5.2.2 Identification of Cell Type
How many different cell types are there in an adult human body?
The usual estimate based on histological studies is that there are
~200 distinct kinds of cells that show alternate structures and
functions.312,531,866 These represent discrete categories of cell types
of markedly different character, not arbitrary subdivisions along a
morphological continuum. Traditional classification is based on
microscopic shape and structure, and on crude chemical nature (e.g.,
affinity for various stains), but newer immunological techniques
have revealed, for instance, that there are more than 10 distinct
types of lymphocytes. Pharmacological and physiological tests have
revealed many different varieties of smooth muscle cells—for
example, uterine wall smooth muscle cells are highly sensitive to
estrogen and (in late pregnancy) oxytocin, while gut wall smooth
muscle cells are not. Appendix C presents a catalog of the cells of
the human body, slightly modified from an original compilation by
Alberts et al.531 The catalog is organized by cellular function and
omits subdivisions of smooth muscle cells, neuron classes in the
CNS, various related connective tissue and fibroblast types, and
intermediate stages of maturing cells such as keratinocytes (only the
stem cell and differentiated cell types are given). Otherwise, the
catalog is said to represent an exhaustive listing of the ~219 cell
varieties found in the adult human phenotype. (Complexity theory
and phylogenetic comparisons suggest that the maximum number
of cell types Ncell ~ Ngene
1/2 = 370 cell types for humans with Ngene
~ 105
 genes).1266,766
Medical nanorobots can probably distinguish all of these cell
types by surface chemical assay using chemosensor pads (Section
4.2.8). Antigenic specificities exist for species (xenotype), organ,
tissue or cell type for almost all cells—possibly involving as many as
~104 distinct antigens. A comprehensive analysis of the
cytoimmunography of all cell types is beyond the scope of this book,
but a few examples of cell type-specific antigenic markers can be
given to illustrate the tremendous power of this approach.
In the case of red blood cells, antigens in the Rh, Kell, Duffy,
and Kidd blood group systems are found exclusively on the plasma
membranes of erythrocytes and have not been detected on platelets,
lymphocytes, granulocytes, in plasma, or in other body secretions
such as saliva, milk, or amniotic fluid.960 Thus detection of any
member of this four-antigen set establishes a unique marker for red
cell identification. MNSs and Lutheran antigens are also limited to
erythrocytes with two exceptions: GPA glycoprotein (MN activity)
also found on renal capillary endothelium,961 and Lub
-like glycoprotein which appears on kidney endothelial cells and liver hepatocytes.962 In contrast, ABH antigens are found on many non-RBC
tissue cells such as kidney and salivary glands.955 In young embryos
ABH can be found on all endothelial and epithelial cells except
those of the central nervous system.963 ABH, Lewis, I and P blood
group antigens are found on platelets and lymphocytes, at least in
part due to adsorption from the plasma onto the cell membrane.
Granulocytes have I antigen but no ABH.960
Platelets also express platelet-specific alloantigens on their plasma
membranes, in addition to the HLA antigens they already share
with body tissue cells. Currently there are five recognized human
platelet alloantigen (HPA) systems that have been defined at the
molecular level (Table 8.15). The phenotype frequencies given are
for the Caucasian population; frequencies in African and Asian
populations may vary substantially. For instance, HPA-1b is
expressed on the platelets of 28% of Caucasians but only 4% of
the Japanese population.964 A medical nanorobot that detects a
Table 8.14. Blood Group Systems and Antigen Collections Recognized in 1997957 (cont’d)
Total # of Common Common % # of Antigen
Conventional Name Antigens Antigens Phenotypes Frequency Sites/RBC
Antigen collections:
Indian 2
Cost 2
Ii 2 I I adult(+I-i) common I adult: 1-5 x 103
i Iint(+I-i) rare
i cord (-I+i) common
i adult(-I+i) <0.01%
Er 2
(P,Pk,LKE) 3
(Lewis-like: Lec
, Led
) 2
Wright 2
Low-prevalence (private) 36
High prevalence (public) 11
Total Number of Antigens = 254
Total Number of Combinations > 1.84 x 1019
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 253
representative antigen from any of these five HPA antigen groups
on an encountered surface can be certain that it has found a
platelet.
Lymphocytes with a particular functional activity can be distinguished by various differentiation markers displayed on their
cell surfaces. For example, all mature T cells express a set of polypeptide
chains called the CD3 complex. Helper T cells also express the CD4
glycoprotein, whereas cytotoxic and suppressor T cells express a
marker called CD8.939 Thus a nanorobot that detects the phenotype
CD3+
CD4+
CD8- has positively identified a helper T cell, whereas
the detection of CD3+
CD4-
CD8+ uniquely identifies a cytotoxic
or suppressor T cell. All B lymphocytes express immunoglobulins
(their antigen receptors, or Ig) on their surface and can be distinguished
from T cells on that basis, e.g., as Ig+
 MHC Class II+
.
939
Lymphocyte surfaces also display distinct markers representing
specific gene products that are expressed only at characteristic stages
of cell differentiation. For example, Stage I Progenitor B cells display
CD34+
PhiLCD19-
; Stage II, CD34+
PhiL+
CD19-
; Stage III,
CD34+
PhiL+
CD19+
; and finally CD34-
PhiL+
CD19+ at the Precursor
B stage.965
There are neutrophil-specific antigens and various
receptor-specific immunoglobulin binding specificities for leukocytes.
For instance, monocyte FcRI receptors display the measured binding
specificity IgG1+++IgG2-
IgG3+++IgG4+
, monocyte FcRIII receptors
have IgG1++IgG2-
IgG3++IgG4-
, and FcRII receptors on neutrophils
and eosinophils show IgG1+++IgG2+
IgG3+++IgG4+
.
955 Neutrophils
also have β-glucan receptors on their surfaces.1403
Tissue cells display specific sets of distinguishing markers on their
surfaces as well. Thyroid microsomal-microvillous antigen is unique
to the thyroid gland.955 Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is an
immunocytochemical marker of astrocytes,947 and syntaxin 1A and
1B are phosphoproteins found only in the plasma membrane of
neuronal cells.1079 Alpha-fodrin is an organ-specific autoantigenic
marker of salivary gland cells.968 Fertilin, a member of the ADAM
family, is found on the plasma membrane of mammalian sperm
cells.2143 Hepatocytes display the phenotypic markers
ALB+++GGTCK19- along with connexin 32, transferrin, and
major urinary protein (MUP), while biliary cells display the markers
AFPGGT+++CK19+++ plus BD.1 antigen, alkaline phosphatase, and
DPP4.966 A family of 100-kilodalton plasma membrane guanosine
triphosphatases implicated in clathrin-coated vesicle (Section 8.5.3.7)
transport include dynamin I (expressed exclusively in neurons),
dynamin II (found in all tissues), and dynamin III (restricted to the
testes, brain, and lungs), each with at least four distinct isoforms;
dynamin II also exhibits intracellular localization in the trans-Golgi
network.1193 Table 8.16 lists numerous unique (to one or the other
cell type) and shared antigenic markers of hepatopoietic (e.g.,
hepatoblast) and hemopoietic (e.g., erythroid progenitor) cells. There
are many tumor-specific antigens, a fact exploited in conventional
peptide-guided chemotherapy.1143
Bacterial membranes are also quite distinctive, including such
obvious markers as the family of outer-membrane trimeric channel
proteins called porins in Gram-negative bacteria like E. coli1045,1053
and other surface proteins such as Staphylococcal protein A 1046 or
endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide or LPS), a variable-size carbohydrate
chain that is the major antigen of the outer membrane of
Gram-negative bacteria. Mycobacteria contain mycolic acid in their
cell walls.2134 In addition, only bacteria employ right-handed amino
acids in their cellular coats, which helps them resist attack by digestive
enzymes in the stomach and other organisms. Peptidoglycans, the
main structural component of bacterial walls, are cross-linked with
peptide bridges that contain several unusual nonprotein amino acids
and D-enantiomeric forms of Ala, Glu, and Asp.1718 D-alanine is
the most abundant D-amino acid found in most peptidoglycans
and the only one that is universally incorporated.1719
At least four major families of cell-specific cell adhesion molecules
had been identified by 1998—the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily
(including N-CAM and ICAM-1), the integrin superfamily, the
cadherin family and the selectin family (see below).
Integrins are ~200 kilodalton cell surface adhesion receptors expressed
on a wide variety of cells, with most cells expressing several integrins.
Most integrins, which mediate cellular connection to the extracellular
matrix, are involved in attachments to the cytoskeletal substratum.
Cell-type-specific examples include platelet-specific integrin (αIIbβ3),
leukocyte-specific β2 integrins, late-activation (αLβ2) lymphocyte
antigens, retinal ganglion axon integrin (α6β1) and keratinocyte
integrin (α5β1).975 At least 20 different heterodimer integrin
receptors were known in 1998.
Table 8.15. Complete Listing of Recognized Human Platelet
Alloantigen (HPA) Systems956
Alloantigen Allelic Former Phenotype
System Forms Names Frequency
HPA-1 HPA-1a P1A1 or Zwa a/a = 72%
a/b = 26%
HPA-1b P1A2 or Zwb b/b = 2%
HPA-2 HPA-2a Kob a/a = 85%
a/b = 14%
HPA-2b Koa b/b = 1%
HPA-3 HPA-3a Baka or Leka a/a = 37%
a/b = 48%
HPA-3b Bakb
 or Lekb b/b = 15%
HPA-4 HPA-4a Pena or Yukb a/a = 99%
a/b 
 0.1%
HPA-4b Penb or Yuka b/b 
 0.1%
HPA-5 HPA-5a Brb
 or Zavb a/a = 80%
a/b = 19%
HPA-5b Bra
, Zava
, or Hca b/b = 1%
Table 8.16. Unique and Shared Antigenic Surface Markers of
Hepatopoietic and Hemopoietic Human Cells966
Hepatopoietic Cells Hemopoietic Cells
(e.g., Hepatoblasts) (e.g., Erythroid Progenitors)
UNIQUE α-fetoprotein, albumin, OX43 (MCA 276),
Antigenic stem cell factor, hepatic OX44 (MCA 371, CD 37),
Markers: heparan sulfate-PGs OX42 (MCA 275, CD118),
(syndecans/perlecans), c-Kit, stem cell factor
IGF I, IGF II, TGF-α, TGF-α receptor, hemopoietic
receptor, α1 integrin, heparan sulfate-PG
α5 integrin, connexin 26 (serglycin), GM-CSF, CSF, α4
and connexin 32 integrin, and red blood
cell antigen
SHARED all known oval cell antigens, tranferrins, γ glutamyl
Antigenic transpeptidase (GGT), glucuronyl transferases (some
Markers: isoforms), glutathione-S-transferases, ligandins, cEBP
isoforms, IL-1 receptor, IL-6 receptor, interferon receptor,
HGF receptor, insulin receptor, MDR1 and MDR2 (multidrug
resistance genes), and connexin 43
254 Nanomedicine • Volume I
The cadherin molecular family of 723-748-residue transmembrane
proteins provides yet another avenue of cell-cell adhesion that is
cell-specific.977 Cadherins are linked to the cytoskeleton. The classical
cadherins include E- (epithelial), N- (neural or A-CAM), and
P- (placental) cadherin, but in 1998 at least 12 different members
of the family were known.980 They are concentrated (though not
exclusively found) at cell-cell junctions on the cell surface and
appear to be crucial for maintaining multicellular architecture. Cells
adhere preferentially to other cells that express the identical cadherin
type. Liver hepatocytes express only E-; mesenchymal lung cells,
optic axons and neuroepithelial cells express only N-; epithelial lung
cells express both E- and P-cadherins. Members of the cadherin
family also are distributed in different spatiotemporal patterns in
embryos, with the expression of cadherin types changing dynamically
as the cells differentiate.977
Carbohydrates are crucial in cell recognition. All cells have a
thin sugar coating (the glycocalyx; Section 8.5.3.2) consisting of
glycoproteins and glycolipids, of which ~3000 different motifs had
been identified by 1998. The repertoire of carbohydrate cell surface
structures changes characteristically as the cell develops, differentiates,
or sickens. For example415:
1. The array of carbohydrates on cancer cells is strikingly different
from that on normal cells.
2. A unique trisaccharide (SSEA-1 or Lex) appears on the surfaces
of cells of the developing embryo exactly at the 8- to 16-cell
stage when the embryo compacts from a group of loose cells
into a smooth ball.
3. Bacterial pathogens often use cell-specific sugars981 to guide them
to their preferred targets—E. coli are abundant in tissues
surrounding the ureters leading from kidneys to bladder but
are rarely found in the upper respiratory tract; group A streptococci, which colonize only the upper respiratory tract and skin,
rarely cause urinary tract infections; the gonorrhea organism
Neisseria gonorrhoeae adheres only to cells of the genital and oral
epithelia but not to cells of other organs.415 These bacterial
carbohydrate specificities (e.g., carbohydrate-specific bacterial
adhesins, lectins, and glycoconjugates) have been at least partially
catalogued.981,3356-3370 and molecular dynamics studies have
begun.3353-3355
Carbohydrate motifs are in theory more combinatorically
diverse than nucleotide- or protein-based structures. While nucleotides
and amino acids can interconnect in only one way, the monosaccharide
units in oligosaccharides and polysaccharides can attach at multiple
points. Thus two amino acids can make only two distinct dipeptides,
but two identical monosaccharides can bond to form 11 different
disaccharides because each monosaccharide has 6 carbons, giving
each unit 6 different attachment points for a total of 6 + 5 = 11
possible combinations. Four different nucleotides can make only
24 distinct tetranucleotides, but four different monosaccharides can
make 35,560 unique tetrasaccharides, including many with branching
structures.415 A single hexasaccharide can make ~1012 distinct
structures, vs. only 6.4 x 107
 structures for a hexapeptide; a 9-mer
carbohydrate has a mole of isomers.3122
The coded sugar coating of red cells has already been described
(Fig. 8.35). As another example, the CD44 family of transmembrane glycoproteins are 80-95 kilodalton cell adhesion receptors
that mediate ECM binding, cell migration and lymphocyte homing. CD44 antigen shows a wide variety of cell-specific and
tissue-specific glycosylation patterns, with each cell type decorating
the CD44 core protein with its own unique array of carbohydrate
structures.972,973 Distinct CD44 cell surface molecules have been
found in lymphocytes, macrophages, fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and
keratinocytes. CD44 expression in the nervous system is restricted
to the white matter (including astrocytes and glial cells) in healthy
young people, but appears in gray matter accompanying age or
disease.972 A few tissues are CD44 negative, including liver hepatocytes, kidney tubular epithelium, cardiac muscle, the testes, and
portions of the skin.972
The selectin family of ~50 kilodalton cell adhesion receptor glycoprotein molecules976,978 can recognize diverse cell-surface antigen
carbohydrates and help localize leukocytes to regions of inflammation
(leukocyte trafficking). Selectins are not attached to the cytoskeleton.980
Leukocytes display L-selectin, platelets display P-selectin, and
endothelial cells display E-selectin (as well as L and P) receptors.
Cell-specific molecules recognized by selectins include tumor
mucin oligosaccharides (recognized by L, P, and E), brain glycolipids
(P and L), neutrophil glycoproteins (E and P), leukocyte
sialoglycoproteins (E and P), and endothelial proteoglycans (P and
L).976 The related MEL-14 glycoprotein homing receptor family
allows lymphocyte homing to specific lymphatic tissues coded with
“vascular addressin”—cell-specific surface antigens found on cells
in the intestinal Peyer’s patches, the mesenteric lymph nodes,
lung-associated lymph nodes, synovial cells and lactating breast
endothelium. Homing receptors also allow some lymphocytes to
distinguish between colon and jejunum.937,974 Selectin-related
interactions, along with chemoattractant receptors and with
integrin-Ig, regulate leukocyte extravasation (Section 9.4.4.1) in
series, establishing a three-digit “area code” for cell localization in
the body.1495
Viral capsid proteins are readily recognized, permitting identification of many virus species.3371-3375 Enveloped viruses, which have
acquired a lipid membrane coating borrowed from the host cell upon
release,1969,3375 will be more difficult to detect by simple surface
marker sensing. A lipid-penetrating sensor or a host-cell “decoy”
sensor (activating membrane fusion protein release (Section 9.4.5.4)
by the virus, thus revealing its true identity) may be more useful.
Finally, cells may be typed according to their indigenous transmembrane cytoskeleton-related proteins. For example, erythrocyte
membranes contain glycophorin C (~25 kilodaltons, ~3000 molecules/
micron2
) and band 3 ion exchanger (90-100 kilodaltons, ~10,000
molecules/micron2
);980,3655 platelet membranes incorporate the GP
Ib-IX glycoprotein complex (186 kilodaltons); cell membrane
extensions in neutrophils require the transmembrane protein
ponticulin (17 kilodaltons); and striated muscle cell membranes
contain a specific laminin-binding glycoprotein (156 kilodaltons)
at the outermost part of the transmembrane dystrophin-glycoprotein
complex.980 There are also a variety of carbohydrate-binding proteins
(lectins) that appear frequently on cell surfaces, and can distinguish
different monosaccharides and oligosaccharides.415 Cell-specific
lectins include the galactose (asialoglycoprotein)-binding and
fucose-binding lectins of hepatocytes, the mannosyl-6-phosphate (M6P)
lectin of fibroblasts, the mannosyl-N-acetylglucosamine-binding
lectin of alveolar macrophages, the galabiose-binding lectins of
uroepithelial cells, and several galactose-binding lectins in heart, brain
and lung.415,970,981,3361
Each cell expresses a different set of genes from the genome, and
each gene normally represents a different protein (although in some
cases alternate splicing can generate several proteins from the same
gene; Chapter 20). Thus it seems plausible to conclude that each
different cell type uses a unique constellation of proteins in its
construction which can be detected as a set by nanorobot
chemosensors, thus unambiguously identifying the cell type.
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 255
(Of course, possibly up to ~50-70% of the proteins in different
cells may be the same, serving common “housekeeping” functions.)
If there are ~400 cell types (including all varieties of smooth muscle
cells, neuron cells, and other cytochemically distinct cell subcategories
not fully enumerated in Appendix C), then every cell type in the
catalog may be uniquely identified using as few as ~log2(400) ~ 9
binary antigenic markers. Given that Nature has employed ~580
markers among the HLA specificities and ~254 markers in the blood
group systems to distinguish self from nonself, it is clear that biological
systems may employ considerable multifunctionality and redundancy.
By 1998 a complete catalog of all cell-specific antigens had not yet
been compiled. However, the completion of sequencing of ~90%
of the human genome by the spring of 20003186 (with the complete
version finished by 2002-20033186,3187), and foreseeable advances
in DNA chip technology (used to sample gene expression patterns),
should allow the rapid determination of unique sets of cell-specific
antigens by circa 2002-2005.
In the worst case, 9 unique antigenic markers would be required
for each of at most ~400 cell types, giving a maximum of 3600
antigenic markers needed to positively identify all cell types. From
Eqn. 8.5, a ~(300 nm)2 chemotactic pad with Nspec = 3600 implies
a maximum cell typing measurement time tmeas ~ 400 sec in mapping
mode. If a more plausible working set of ~300 key antigenic markers
will suffice, then tmeas ~ 3 sec in mapping mode. On the other hand,
a nanorobot searching for a particular set of Nspec = 9 binary antigenic
markers (e.g., seeking only liver cells, rejecting all nonliver cells)
requires just tmeas ~ 0.002 sec to make the cell-type determination.
8.5.3 Cytography
Cytography is concerned with the “geography” of the cell and
directing navigation through the intracellular spaces. Discussion of
the nucleus, the largest and most important cellular organelle, is
deferred to Section 8.5.4. Methods of cell entry are described in
Section 9.4.5.
8.5.3.1 Overall Cellular Structure
As recently as the late 1970s, the cell was often incorrectly
described as a water-filled membranous sac enclosing a loosely
structured population of discrete organelles. In reality, the interior
of a cell is extremely compact, only a few times more open than a
hydrated protein crystal.941The cell interior is crisscrossed by many
tens of thousands of cytoskeletal filaments of various gauges, attaching
organelles to the nucleus, the plasma membrane, the ECM, and to
each other.942
Cells also have various shapes. Most cells are surrounded by and
are anchored to neighboring cells. Such immobilized cells usually
assume a polyhedral shape. Specialized cells adopt shapes related to
the specific functions they perform. A dramatic example is the nerve
cell, which has one or more cylindrical processes extending from
the cell like the branches of a tree, which processes allow the cell to
receive and to transmit electrical signals.
From the nanomedical perspective, the cell (Fig. 8.36) may be
regarded as a large machine constructed of many smaller
machines.182 These smaller machines are the organelles. Organelles
are typically 0.5-3 microns in diameter, roughly the same size as the
largest bloodborne medical nanorobots. Table 8.17 is a very
approximate quantification of the known classes of cellular organelles
and other major cellular components. Cytoskeletal number densities
are crude but self-consistent estimates. Actual data may differ widely
from the values given in the table depending upon:
1. size, age, and type of cell;
2. global and local respiration, nutrition and energy demand;
3. tissue and organ location;
4. environmental factors such as temperature, pressure, salinity,
ECM activity, and extracytosolic toxicology; and
5. cellular secretory and mitotic status.
Organelles represent the principal metabolic and structural machinery
of the cell. Each organelle type or cellular component is engineered
to carry out specific functions while maintaining a specific structure, as
described briefly below.
The small size of most organelles makes intra-organelle locomotion
by whole nanorobots difficult or impossible, with the possible
exception of the nucleus (Sections 8.5.4 and 9.4.6). This does not
Fig. 8.36. Schematic cutaway view of a typical human cell (redrawn
from Guyton863).
Fig. 8.37. Fluid mosaic model of the lipid bilayer membrane, with
embedded proteins (redrawn from Murray et al996).
256 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Table 8.17. Approximate Quantification of the Components of a Typical 20-µm Human Tissue Cell531,997
Typical Typical Typical Total Item Total Item Total Item Total Item
Cellular Component Typical Length or Surface Typical Number Volume Volume Surface Surface
or Organelle Diameter Thickness Area Volume per Cell in Cell as a % Area in Cell Area as a %
Glycocalyx
(external to cell) ~20µm 10-50nm 2400µm2 12-120µm3 1 12-120µm3 2400µm2 0.5%
Plasma membrane
(~900 kg/m3
) 20µm 6-10nm 2400µm2 14-24µm3 1 ~20µm3 0.3% 2400µm2 0.5%
Ribosomes 25nm 15-30nm 0.002µm2 8000nm3 ~107 80µm3 1.0% 20,000µm2 4.3%
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum ~µm -- -- 1120µm3 1 1120µm3 14.0% --
Cisternae -- -- -- 720µm3 -- 720µm3 --
Membrane -- 5-6nm 70,000µm2 400µm3 -- 400µm3 70,000µm2 14.9%
Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum ~µm -- -- 420µm3 1 420µm3 5.3% --
Cisternae -- -- -- 240µm3 -- 240µm3 --
Membrane -- 5-6nm 32,000µm2 180µm3 -- 180µm3 32,000µm2 6.8%
Golgi complex
(~1090 kg/m3
) ~µm -- -- 410-510µm3 1-300 stks 450µm3 5.6% --
Cisternae -- -- -- 300-400µm3 -- 350µm3 --
Membrane -- avg. 8nm 14,000µm2 110µm3 -- 110µm3 14,000µm2 3.0%
Golgi vesicles
(~1120 kg/m3
) 30-80nm -- 0.008µm2 65,000nm3 ~200,000 13µm3 0.2% 1400µm2 0.3%
Secretory vesicles
(~1120 kg/m3
) 0.1-1µm -- 0.13µm2 0.004µm3 ~50,000 210µm3 2.6% 6000µm2 1.3%
Glycogen granules
(1560 kg/m3
) 10-40nm -- 0.002µm2 10,000nm3 ~100,000 1µm3 0.01% 200µm2 0.04%
Lipid droplets
(850 kg/m3
) 0.2-5µm -- ~1µm2 0.1µm3 ~100? 10µm3 0.1% 100µm2 0.02%
Vaults 55nm 30nm 0.003µm2 50,000nm3 ~3000 0.16µm3 0.002% 10µm2 0.002%
Lysosomes
(1120 kg/m3
) 0.5-1µm -- -- 0.31µm3 ~300 ~90µm3 1.1% --
Body -- -- -- 0.30µm3 -- ~90µm3 --
Membrane -- 5-6nm 2.2µm2 0.01µm3 -- 0.017µm3 600µm2 0.1%
Proteasomes ~11nm ~36nm 0.002µm2 3400nm3 ~107 ~20µm3 0.2% 8000µm2 1.7%
Peroxisomes
(1250 kg/m3
) 0.5-1µm -- -- 0.31µm3 ~300 ~90µm3 1.1% --
Body -- -- -- 0.30µm3 -- ~90µm3 --
Membrane -- 5-6nm 2.2µm2 0.01µm3 -- 0.017µm3 600µm2 0.1%
Mitochondria
(1190 kg/m3
) 0.5-1µm 2-3µm 6.3µm2 ~1µm3 300-3000 1000µm3 12.5% --
Outer membrane 5-6nm 6.3µm2 0.035µm3 -- -- 6000µm2 1.3%
Inner membrane 5-6nm 30µm2 0.17µm3 -- -- (30,000µm2
)
Cytoskeleton, total -- -- -- -- 1 875µm3 10.9% 280,000µm2 59.2%
Superfine filaments 2-4nm 10-100nm 400nm2 450nm3 ~108 45µm3 40,000µm2
Microfilaments 5-7nm ~µm 0.02µm2 36,000nm3 ~107 360µm3 200,000µm2
Intermed. filaments 8-12nm ~µm 0.03µm2 100,000nm3 ~106 100µm3 30,000µm2
Thick filaments 15nm 1-10µm 0.2µm2 900,000nm3 <104 -- --
Microtubules 25nm 0.2-25µm 0.016-2µm2 0.0001-0.02µm3 ~50,000 370µm3 10,000µm2
Centrioles 150nm 300-500nm 0.22µm2 0.007µm3 2 0.014µm3 0.0002% 0.44µm2
Nucleus, total 8µm -- -- 268µm3 1 268µm3 3.4% 27,500µm2 5.9%
Nuclear envelope 8µm -- -- -- 1 -- 400µm2
 (Outer layer) ~8µm 7-8nm 200µm2 1.5µm3 -- 1.5µm3 200µm2
 (Inner layer) ~8µm 7-8nm 200µm2 1.5µm3 -- 1.5µm3 200µm2
Perinuclear space -- 20-40nm -- 6µm3 1 6µm3 --
Nuclear pores 70-90nm ~100nm ~40,000nm2 0.0005µm3 2000-4000 1.5µm3 120µm2
Nuclear cortex ~7.9µm 30-40nm 196µm2 6.9µm3 1 6.9µm3 196µm2
Nucleolus <5µm -- <78µm2 25-65µm3 1 45µm3 --
 Nucleosomes 10nm 6nm 350nm2 400nm3 2.5 x 106 10µm3 8750µm2
 Chromatin 1.9nm 65mm 390µm2 0.18µm3 46 8.3µm3 18,000µm2
Nucleoplasm -- -- -- ~206µm3 1 ~206µm3 --
Cytosol (~1020 kg/m3
) -- -- -- ~3348µm3 1 ~3348µm3 41.9% --
Cytoplasm -- -- -- ~7712µm3 1 ~7712µm3 96.4% --
Cell, total(~1064 kg/m3
) ~20µm ~20µm 2400µm2 8000µm3 1 8000µm3 100% 469,000µm2 100%
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 257
preclude insertion of specialized sensory tools or small manipulatory
devices into organelle interiors.
8.5.3.2 Cell Membrane
The cell and most organelles are individually surrounded by their
own thin envelope. The envelope surrounding the entire cell is called
the plasma membrane.1968 According to the fluid mosaic model,1189
all membranes are composed of a double layer of lipid molecules,
called the lipid bilayer, in which proteins are embedded (Fig. 8.37).
The lipid bilayer acts as a barrier to the diffusion of polar solutes,
whereas the embedded proteins provide the pathways for
1. the selective transfer of certain molecular substances through
the lipid barrier, and
2. the mechanical transfer of information from the ECM into the
interior of the cell.
The plasma membrane actually represents only a tiny fraction of
the total membrane surface in the cell. For example, the combined
membrane surface area of the endoplasmic reticulum (Section
8.5.3.5) is 44 times larger than the plasma membrane surface area
for a typical human cell (Table 8.17).
Lipid bilayer plasma membranes are 6-10 nm thick. The major
membrane lipids are phospholipids, fatty acid chains in the range
of 16-18 carbons long; chains with fewer than 12 carbons cannot
form a stable bilayer.939 Phospholipid chains are amphipathic
molecules—one end, the head, has a negatively-charged (polar)
region, while the remainder of the molecule, the tail, consists of
two (nonpolar) long fatty acid chains. The phospholipids in cell
membranes self-organize into a bimolecular layer, with the nonpolar
fatty acid chains in the middle. The polar regions are oriented
toward the membrane surfaces due to their attraction to the polar
water molecules in the extracellular and cytosolic fluids (Fig. 8.37).
The plasma membrane also contains other lipids (Table 8.18).
For example, cholesterol, a steroid lipid, acts as a “mortar” that fills
in small gaps in the phospholipid structure, thus improving membrane
impermeability to small water-soluble molecules like glucose by a
factor of ten. Cholesterol also acts as a membrane antifreeze agent,
decreasing bilayer fluidity at higher temperatures (e.g., raising lipid
bilayer “melting point”) and preventing hydrocarbon chains of
phospholipids from aggregating at lower temperatures (e.g., lowering
membrane “freezing point”). Plasma membranes may contain up
to ~1 cholesterol molecule for each phospholipid molecule. The
precise lipid composition of plasma membranes varies from one cell
type to another, and also varies among the membranes of organelles
within each cell type (Table 8.18). Medical nanorobots equipped
with suitable chemosensors may access this information, both for
cell type identification during extracellular navigation and for
organelle type identification during intracellular navigation.
There are ~5 x 106 lipid molecules in a 1 micron2 area of lipid
bilayer531 or ~2.5 bilayer lipid pairs/nm2 of cell membrane surface.
Thus the plasma membrane of a typical 20-micron human tissue cell
contains ~10 billion lipid molecules. Phospholipids are not
covalently bound to each other, so each lipid molecule is free to
move independently, resulting in considerable random lateral
movement parallel to the bilayer surfaces. The long fatty acid chains
each include one unsaturated bond, producing a kink in the
otherwise straight chain that prevents close packing (and solidification).
The chains also wiggle back and forth, so the lipid bilayer has fluidlike
characteristics much like a layer of oil on a water surface. Movement of
hydrophilic head groups through the hydrophobic interior of the
membrane is thermodynamically unfavorable. Such flip-flopping,
or transverse diffusion, does occur in membrane lipids but is relatively
slow. For instance, a typical phospholipid molecule undergoes transverse diffusion (one flip flop between monolayers) once every
several hours in a lipid bilayer. By contrast, lateral diffusion of
phospholipids (movement within each monolayer) is so rapid that
a lipid molecule can move 10 microns (the equivalent of ~12% of
cell circumference) in a few seconds.939 (But see Section 9.4.3.3
regarding the membrane-skeleton fence model.)
Membrane proteins are embedded in the lipid bilayer plasma
membrane. Indeed, it has been said that the lipid bilayer serves as a
“solvent” for membrane proteins.531 The plasma membrane contains
roughly equal masses of lipid and protein (Table 8.18). However,
the mass of an individual protein molecule is much larger than the
mass of any lipid molecule, so there are 10-100 times more lipid
molecules than protein molecules.997 The plasma membrane of a
typical 20-micron human tissue cell contains ~0.1 billion protein
molecules.
There are two classes of membrane proteins: Integral (intrinsic)
membrane proteins and peripheral (extrinsic) membrane proteins.
Integral membrane proteins are closely associated with membrane
lipids and cannot be extracted from the membrane without disrupting
Table 8.18. Mass % Biochemical Composition of Cell and Organelle Membranes531,939,996,997
Mitochondrion Endoplasmic E.coli
Liver Cell Red Cell Myelin Inner/Outer Reticulum (Bacterial
Type of Membrane Molecule Plasma Membrane Plasma Membrane Sheath Membranes Membrane Membrane)
Lipid -- 40% ~81% ~24%/~48% -- --
Protein ~50% 52% ~19% ~76%/~52% ~50% ~50%
Carbohydrate -- 8% -- -- -- --
Lipid Class:
Cholesterol 17% 23% 22% 3% 6% 0%
Phospholipids
Phosphatidylethanolamine 7% 18% 15% 35% 17% 70%
Phosphatidylserine 4% 7% 9% 2% 5% trace
Phosphatidylcholine 24% 17% 10% 39% 40% 0%
Sphingomyelin 19% 18% 8% 0% 5% 0%
Glycolipids 7% 3% 28% trace trace 0%
Other lipids 22% 13% 8% 21% 27% 30%
258 Nanomedicine • Volume I
the lipid bilayer. Like phospholipids, integral proteins are
amphipathic. Polar amino acid side chains lie in one region of the
molecule and nonpolar side chains are in a separate region. Thus
integral proteins vertically align with the amphipathic lipids in the
plasma membrane—protein polar regions position themselves at
the surfaces in association with polar water molecules, while the
protein nonpolar regions are attracted to the interior in association
with the nonpolar fatty acid chains at the center of the lipid bilayer
membrane (Fig. 8.37; see also Figures 8.33 and 8.34). Many
integral proteins can move laterally in the membrane; others are
immobilized by links to a network of peripheral proteins located
near the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane. How fast do embedded
proteins laterally diffuse? If a single hybrid cell is created by fusing
two cells having radiochemically-tagged membrane protein molecules,
~1 hour is needed for the two populations of transmembrane protein
molecules to become thoroughly randomly intermixed.939
Most integral proteins are transmembrane proteins with polar
regions at each end and a nonpolar region in the middle, spanning
the entire membrane. These polar regions may extend up to 10-20
nm beyond the surface of the lipid bilayer, forming channels through
which water, ions, or chemical signals can pass into the cell (Section
3.3.3). A few integral proteins do not cross the entire membrane
and are found only in the outer or inner layer, performing functions
localized to only one membrane surface. These proteins are also
amphipathic and oriented parallel to the lipid molecules. Some are
anchored to the membrane by covalent bonds with phospholipids.
For example, in the red blood cell membrane, glycophorin spans
the entire membrane, all glycolipids and most of the phosphatidylcholine are in the outer monolayer, and the majority of the
phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylserine molecules are
in the inner monolayer where most of the proteins reside. (Cholesterol
is distributed about equally between the two layers.) The number
of different integral proteins in a membrane ranges from 6-8 in the
sarcoplasmic reticulum to over 100 in the plasma membrane
(including enzymes, transport and structural proteins, antigens and
receptors), many of which are present in only a few copies per cell,
although the 135 micron2 red cell surface has ~1 x 106 copies of the
glycophorin A molecule and ~1 x 105
 copies of glycophorin B.1091
Peripheral membrane proteins are bound to the hydrophilic
regions of integral membrane proteins or to the hydrophilic heads
of membrane lipids by weak electrostatic forces.939 Most peripheral
proteins are located near the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma
membrane rather than on the extracellular surface and mediate such
properties as cell shape and motility. Peripheral proteins are not
amphipathic and do not associate with the hydrophobic regions of
the lipids in the membrane interior.
Both lipid and protein components of the plasma membrane are
continually removed and replaced. Turnover allows the cell to
continuously change out damaged components. This is a highly
selective process, since the rate of turnover varies for different proteins
and lipids. For instance, the half-life of some phospholipids in
membranes is ~10,000 sec;939 the “off-rate” (half-life) for cholesterol
from a lipid bilayer (e.g., the red cell surface) into the cytoplasm is
~7200 sec at 310 K.1113 Protein turnover half-lives may range from
several minutes to several years, but the “typical” protein has a turnover
half-life of ~200,000 sec531,939 or ~2 days. Protein replacement is
carried out by protease enzymes located in the cytoplasm and in
lysosomes. Replacement rates also depend upon cell type. For
example, the plasma membrane surface of the macrophage has an
unusually fast mean turnover time, ~1800 sec, vs. ~5400 sec for
fibroblasts.996
The plasma membrane also contains small amounts of carbohydrate. This carbohydrate is covalently linked to some of the
membrane lipids and proteins. Carbohydrate portions of the
membrane glycoproteins (e.g., Section 8.5.2) are always located at
the extracellular surface, forming the glycocalyx (together with
collagen proteins and glycosaminoglycans, aka “mucopolysaccharides”).
The red cell membrane, for instance, contains 52% protein, 40%
lipid, and 8% carbohydrate by weight.939 A small proportion of
membrane carbohydrate is glycolipids, but most is in the form of
glycoproteins. The sugar units are usually short oligosaccharide
chains attached to serine, threonine, or asparagine side chains.
The glycocalyx, or fuzzy coat, lies exterior to the plasma membrane.
In most cell types, the glycocalyx is 10-100 nm thick consisting of
tangled strands of up to ~10,000-atom glycoproteins each measuring
5-8 nm thick and up to 100-200 nm in length.531,998 The
experimentally-measured thickness of the glycocalyx of various cells
ranges from ~6 nm for human blood-group A erythrocytes,3163 to
13 nm in Eimeriamicrogametes,3588 20-30 nm for chick fibroblasts,3589
30-60 nm for human bladder cells,3590 40-70 nm for human lymphocytes,3591 ~50 nm for human myocardial cells,3592 56 nm for frog
mesenteric microvessels,3593 >70 nm for rat vasculature,3594 ~81 nm
for rabbit endothelial cells of the systemic arteries (e.g. carotid),3164
and 90 nm for human cochlear hair cells.3595 The most prominent
glycocali are found in intestinal epithelial cells, where the fuzzy coat
may reach 150 nm in thickness and consists primarily of oligosaccharide chains 1.2-2.5 nm in diameter.939 (There is one report of
rat venule endothelial cells with glycocali up to 870 nm thick,3594
and a few macroscopic parasites such as the fork-tailed cercariae of
the blood fluke Schistosoma mansomi have glycocali 500-2000 nm
thick.3596)
The glycoproteins of the glycocalyx provide a set of highly specific
biological markers that are readily recognizable by suitably equipped
medical nanorobots. These markers assist normal cellular interactions
by allowing blood group recognition, bacterial and toxin binding
sites, egg recognition by sperm, immune responses, guidance of
embryonic development, and cellular lifespan determination (e.g.
the red cell coat thins with age which may serve as an RBC removal
signal for phagocytes and in the liver).940
The cell’s surface is also strewn with numerous pits and
indentations. For example, one class of these is the “coated pits”
whose inner surfaces are covered by a dense layer of the protein
clathrin, important in receptor-mediated endocytosis wherein proteins
and other large molecules are imported into the cytoplasm (Section
8.5.3.7). Another class of membrane indentation is the ~50 nm
caveolae (“tiny caves”) that serve to draw substances such as vitamins
and signal transduction molecules into the cell’s interior.1137,3376-3379
Caveolae are coated with a unique membrane marker protein called
caveolin, making them easy for nanorobots to identify.
8.5.3.3 Cytosol
In traditional cell biology, the “cytoplasm” is the filling substance
in the large space enclosed by the plasma membrane and surrounding
the cell nucleus. It includes all non-nuclear cell organelles plus all
fluid surrounding these organelles. Every point inside the cell,
except the nucleus, is considered part of the cytoplasm. The “cytosol” is
the liquid that fills all of the cytoplasmic region, except for fluids
filling the interior of the cell organelles. Finally, the term “intracellular
fluid” refers to all of the fluid inside a cell—the cytosol plus the
fluid inside each organelle, including the nucleus. Internal hydrostatic
pressure in the cytosol ranges from ~23 N/m2 in the human erythrocyte cell1452 up to ~1.6 x 105
 N/m2
 in Amoeba proteus.
1453
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 259
Fulton941 points out that in an average protein crystal ~40% of
crystal mass is solvent water—half strongly absorbed by the protein
in the hydration shell and half resembling bulk water in its properties.
Protein crystals may range from 20-90% solvent, or 10-80% protein,
by weight. Muscle cells are ~23% protein, red cells ~35%, and
actively growing cells contain 17-26% protein by weight.938 Thus
the cytosolic environment more closely resembles proteinaceous
crystals than dilute solutions (e.g., <0.1% proteins).
Hydration water is not immobile water like ice, but it does have
reduced mobility, different solvating characteristics, a higher heat
capacity, and is generally more ordered than bulk water.1936 Water
of hydration coats the macromolecular cell components such as
carbohydrates, nucleic acids, and the proteins of membranes, and
is required for enzyme activity. Mammalian cells can maintain
glycolysis and normal respiration down to 60% dehydration, which
suggests that in a typical cell the cytosol may consist of ~60% bulk
water and ~40% water of hydration. Distribution of ordered water
in the cell is a heterogeneous and dynamic process, possibly
cytonavigationally useful. For instance, ~55% of the water of the
vegetal pole region of the frog oocyte is bound water, with only
~25% bound near the animal pole cytoplasm and ~10% bound in
the nucleus.1937
Minton1010 showed that the volume occupied by proteins affects
the activity of the other proteins in solution by “crowding” them
into a smaller volume where they have less freedom of movement,
forcing them into compact configurations that would occur far less
frequently in dilute solutions. These effects can produce 50-100-fold
excesses in protein activity over the values predicted from dilute
solutions. Crowding also reduces diffusion mobility—60%-70% of
glycolytic enzymes are freely diffusing (30%-40% are immobilized
on the matrix) in squid axoplasm that contains 2% protein by weight,
but only 20% of cytoplasmic proteins are freely diffusing in oocyte
cytoplasm that contains 30%-40% protein by weight.941 Crowding
effects could be nonspecific and due simply to protein number density,
or they could be specific and maintained by selection. McConkey1011
estimates that about half of the polypeptides in the cell may participate
in specific associational structures. For instance, many enzymes exist in
complexes that may involve a dozen or more proteins, potentially
complicating required nanorobotic actions; according to the substrate
channelling hypothesis, these complexes can help speed up reactions.
Even without these crowding effects, cells display localized
biochemical gradients that are cytonavigationally significant. Specific
molecules, organelles and physiological processes may be localized
to defined zones within the cell. This regional cytoplasmic differentiation is regulated in part by cytosolic Ca++ ion and by H+ ion
(pH) spatial gradients.1076,1077 As another example, the cytosol
immediately surrounding the Golgi apparatus is compositionally
distinct from the cytosol that closely encircles the cell nucleus.531
Active chemical processing taking place within most cellular organelles
produces persistent concentration gradients that may be used by in
cyto nanorobots to establish proximity to specific organelles.
Microsecond-cycle chemical nanosensors (Section 4.2.1) can sample
the local environment far faster than the typical time required for a
molecule to diffuse a distance of ~1 micron, the mean separation
between adjacent major organelles inside human cells. Taking
cytoplasm absolute viscosity η ~ 6 x 10-3 kg/m-sec,362 then from
Eqn. 3.1 the 1-micron diffusion time τdiffuse >> tmeas (~1 microsec)
for small molecules like amino acids or glucose (τdiffuse ~ 5000
microsec) or for 100,000-dalton macromolecules measuring ~10 nm
in diameter (τdiffuse ~ 130,000 microsec).
Control proteins such as the transcription factors that regulate
gene expression are typically present in only ~300-3000 copies of
each type per cell. More common cytosolic proteins may be present
in numbers up to 106
-107
 copies of each type per cell.
8.5.3.4 Ribosomes
Ribosomes are the smallest and most numerous “organelle”
(macromolecular assembly) in the human cell. A typical liver cell
contains 107 ribosomes constituting ~5% of the total dry mass of
the cell. Cells less actively involved in protein synthesis have correspondingly fewer ribosomes. Some ribosomes float freely in the cytosol,
making proteins for intracellular use. Others are attached to membranes
or to the cytoskeleton, synthesizing proteins destined for membranes
or for export from the cell.
Ribosomes are ~25 nm in diameter. Each of the several types of
ribosome (containing rRNA) is constructed of two subunits that fit
snugly together. A typical ribosome might have a mass of 4.2 million
daltons, comprised of 2.8 million daltons for the large ribonucleoprotein 60S subunit (~23 nm diameter) and 1.4 million daltons
for the small ribonucleoprotein 40S subunit (~9 nm diameter).938,996
There is no intrinsic difference between free cytosolic ribosomes
(50% or more of the total) and membrane-bound ribosomes—it is
the “signal” sequence on the end of the protein being synthesized
that directs a free ribosome to become a bound ribosome.
The ribosome is an ATP-powered protein-assembling machine
(Fig. 2.2). Amino acids drawn from the cytosol are presented to the
ribosome, which incorporates them one by one into polypeptides at
~20 Hz.531 The complete synthesis of an average-sized protein takes
20-60 seconds. Even during this short period, multiple initiations take
place, with a new ribosome hopping onto the 5' starting end of an
mRNA (messenger) molecule almost as soon as the preceding
ribosome has translated enough of the amino acid sequence to get
out of the way, thus allowing the assembly of many copies of the
same protein to proceed almost in parallel.531Thus, under physiological conditions, actively translated mRNA is found in polyribosomes,
or polysomes, formed by gangs of multiple ribosomes spaced as close
as 80 nucleotides apart along a single messenger molecule (Fig. 8.38).
Further discussion of ribosomes may be found in Volume II.
Fig. 8.38. Schematic of polyribosome (redrawn from Alberts et al531).
260 Nanomedicine • Volume I
8.5.3.5 Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the principal protein manufacturing facility of the cell (aside from free ribosomes), is the most
spatially extensive cytoplasmic organelle (Fig. 8.39). The ER is an
interconnecting membranous network of fluid-filled vesicles,
branching tubules, and flattened sacs or cavities called cisternae,
possessed by almost all eukaryotic cells. The 5-6 nm thick membrane
of the endoplasmic reticulum typically constitutes more than half
of the total membrane surface area present in a cell. The membranes
enclose a space that is continuous throughout the network and
connects with the perinuclear space between the two membranes
of the nuclear envelope (Section 8.5.4.1), allowing transport of
manufactured substances throughout the cell. The fluid occupying
the luminal or cisternal space of the ER, which is typically 20-40
nm wide but ranges from 10-70 nm, is called the reticuloplasm.
There are ER-specific luminal proteins called reticuloplasmins found
only in the reticuloplasm999—if these proteins are detected, a
nanorobot has localized its position uniquely to this space. For
example, molecular chaperones that assist in protein folding and
are unique to the ER lumen include immunoglobin heavy-chain
binding protein (BiP) and calnexin.1080 BiP bears the “KDEL” amino
acid sequence (Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu) at its C-terminus, a tagging
sequence specifying that a protein is intended for attachment to the
luminal surface of the ER cisterna.996There is evidence that specific
compartments or subdomains within the ER may perform specialized
functions and may also bear unique chemical markers,1138 thus
allowing nanorobots to distinguish different regions of the ER.
There are two varieties of endoplasmic reticulum—rough or
“granular” ER, and smooth or “agranular” ER, both present in the
same cell. One variety or the other may predominate in a given cell
type depending on the specific functions performed by the cell, and
the mix may change within the same cell during different periods of
cell activity. Both are anchored to and mobilized by cytoskeletal
motor proteins.
Rough ER is an extensive membranous network of flattened
sheets with a flattened sac appearance and a continuous cisternal
space that communicates directly with the perinuclear space. Ribosomes
are bound to the ER membrane only on the cytosolic surface, loosely
attached by short cylindrical conduits comprised of the Sec61 trimeric
protein complex1024 spanning the ER membrane and produced
exclusively in the granular ER. Ribosome-produced proteins enter
the cisternal space through these conduits, called translocons,1018
in the ER membrane. Found in all nucleated cells except sperm,
rough ER synthesizes proteins and packages proteins destined to be
secreted by cells. The rough ER is also the site of the initial steps in
the addition of sugar groups to glycoproteins by dolichol, a hydrophobic lipid that resides in the ER membrane with its active group facing
the ER lumen.997 Rough ER is especially abundant in cells that are
specialized for protein secretion such as the pancreatic acinar cells
and antibody-secreting plasma cells, or that are specialized for
extensive membrane synthesis such as the immature egg cell or the
retinal rod cell. In such cases, almost half of the total ribosomes
present in the cell may be bound to the granular ER. Glycoproteins
produced in the rough ER become encapsulated by bits of ER
membrane, which bud off and migrate along cytoskeletal elements
to the Golgi complex for further processing.
Smooth ER has a branched, tubular structure with no ribosomes
on its surface, though its interior is continuous with the granular
ER. Agranular ER has enzymes in the cisternal side of its membrane
that allow it to synthesize carbohydrates, lipids (including neutral
fats, phospholipids and steroids), and lipoproteins (in liver cells),
and that allow it to assist in drug detoxification in the liver and
kidney.940 Muscle cells have a specialized, elaborate smooth ER called
the sarcoplasmic reticulum that sequesters Ca++ (which controls
muscle contraction) from the cytosol. Cells in the testes that synthesize
steroid hormones from cholesterol have an expanded smooth ER
compartment to accommodate enzymes needed to synthesize
cholesterol and then to modify it to make steroid hormones.
8.5.3.6 Golgi Complex
The Golgi complex (GC) is a multicisternal membranous structure
crudely similar to the rough ER (minus the ribosomes). Substances
synthesized by the ER usually pass via vesicles traversing the cytoplasm
on microtubule tracks to the Golgi complex, where they are further
processed, concentrated, sorted, containerized in appropriate
self-identifying new vesicles, and then shipped out to various
destinations. Some oligosaccharides are synthesized in the ER, while
extensive portions of the same structures are degraded in the
Golgi—competing sets of reactions that are crucial in fixing the
“address” of the intracellular compartment to which a newly synthesized macromolecule will be sent. Thus the GC serves as a
production editor, allowing several successive sorting steps to take
place while reducing the overall cytomanufacturing error rate. The
Golgi acts as a “countercurrent” fractionation system to separate
proteins destined for the plasma membrane from those to be
retained in the ER.1116
Morphologically, the Golgi complex consists of a series of flattened,
membranous saccules, forming disk-shaped cisternae that are stacked
together to form a cup-shaped structure. Cisternal boundaries are
morphologically distinct and are only rarely, if at all, connected.
3439,3440 A series of 5-8 saccules comprises a single Golgi stack or
dictyosome, typically measuring ~1 micron in diameter and ~250
nm thick. As with the ER, the size and number of Golgi complexes
vary according to cell type and metabolic activity. All eukaryotic
cells have a GC. Some cells have just one stack; others, particularly
those especially active in secretion, may have hundreds.531 One
enzyme,thiamine pyrophosphatase, occurs only in Golgi membranes,939
and galactosyl transferase is found only in the GC.996 These may be
used by nanorobots as unique cytochemical markers of the Golgi
complex.
The Golgi complex is a dynamic structure. The saccules of the
GC form by the fusion of vesicles budded off from the ER. As these
vesicles reach the GC and fuse, they give rise to new saccules on the
forming (“cis”) face of the organelle. Existing saccules move forward
(outward) in the stack. Meanwhile, on the maturing (“trans”) face
Fig. 8.39. Schematic of rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum,
and the Golgi complex (redrawn from Becker and Deamer939).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 261
of the GC, vesicles bud off the tips of the saccules continuously
and exit the complex, transported on cytoskeletal elements
through an interaction with motor proteins. This is known as the
“cisternal maturation model.”2347,3443-3445 Within the Golgi, net
membrane flow can be quite rapid. In certain mucus-secreting cells
of the intestinal mucosa, it takes only ~2000 sec for membrane
components to move from the forming face of a Golgi stack to the
maturing face.939 Vesicles exhibiting COPI (coat protein I) apparently
transport some proteins backwards, both within the Golgi stack
and also from the Golgi to the ER.2347 One study counted ~400
individual vesicles in transit within ~0.2 microns of a ~4 micron3
region containing 2 stacks of 7 cisternae.3440
The two faces of a Golgi stack are biochemically distinct. Specific
enzymes and receptor proteins are concentrated in the cisterna on
the “cis” face of the stack (the “receiving” end), while other proteins
are localized mainly in the cisterna on the “trans” face (the “shipping”
end). For example, the receptor protein for the carbohydrate
mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) is present only in the forming cisterna of
the Golgi stack, thus allowing the stack to recognize these proteins
and target them to the lysosomes.939 A 28,000-dalton protein called
GS28 acts as one of the targeting receptors involved in the recognition
of ER-derived vesicles that are destined for fusion with the cis-Golgi
membrane.1033 By 1998, more than two dozen different members
of the small G protein superfamily (including the Rab and Arf protein
families) had been implicated in the regulation of intracellular
vesicular trafficking and membrane recognition. The Golgi complex
also contains substantial amounts of cholesterol and sphingolipids,
making a rising gradient from cis to trans.1117 Various Golgi compartments are defined by the presence of particular enzymes (e.g.,
glycosidases, glycosyltransferases, and others involved in protein
modification or sphingolipid synthesis) that are localized to one or
more compartments, often in a graded manner.1118,1119 While all
cisternae are fenestrated and display coated buds, the trans-most
cisterna produces exclusively clathrin-coated buds, whereas the others
display only nonclathrin coated buds.3440 Such distinctions will
allow in cyto medical nanorobots with suitable transmembrane
chemical sensor tools to readily establish Golgi stack configuration,
polarity, and physical extent.
The Golgi stack has other easily detectable asymmetries. Since
the GC mediates the flow of secretory proteins from the ER to the
cell exterior, the GC displays spatially variant protein and lipid
compositional gradients along the Golgi polarity axis. Specifically,
the saccule membranes at the forming face resemble those of the
ER in morphology and composition—~5-6 nm thick membranes
defining a relatively narrow ~30-80 nm cisternal space, with ~20%
phosphatidylcholine in the membrane. At the maturing pole, the
saccule membranes more closely resemble the plasma membrane,
~10 nm thick, with a much wider cisternal space (>100 nm) and with
~10% phosphatidylcholine in the membrane. (Variable membrane
thickness is part of the control mechanism for spatially anisotropic
budding).1113 Another asymmetry: Swarms of ~50 nm diameter
membrane-bound vesicles always cluster on the side of the Golgi
stack abutting the ER and along the circumference of a stack near
the dilated rims of each cisterna.
8.5.3.7 Vesicles, Granules, and Vaults
For most membranes, such as those of the Golgi complex and
lysosomes, the transfer of manufactured lipid and protein from the
rough ER occurs by means of 30-80 nm transport vesicles that pinch
off from the rough ER and fuse with the target membranes. Some
of these vesicles are coated with a bristlelike polyhedral lattice of
clathrin subunits.3450,3451 Clathrin, a 180,000-dalton protein, is a
distinctive feature of vesicles involved in a variety of intracellular
transport processes. Besides bringing secretory proteins from the
ER to the GC, clathrin-coated vesicles also transport membrane
proteins from the GC to lysosomes (Section 8.5.3.8), to the plasma
membrane (Section 8.5.3.2), and to other cellular destinations. In
each case the clathrin coat forms a basket or cage around the vesicle,
and transport involves cytoskeletal elements. Clathrins are cell specific—
for example, neuron clathrins have 12 pentagons and 20 hexagons,
liver clathrins have 30 hexagons, and fibroblast clathrins have 60
hexagons and thus may be distinguished by medical nanorobots. In
cultured cells, assembly of a free clathrin-coated vesicle takes ~1
minute, and >300-1000/min can be formed.3448,3449
Cellular products are concentrated and packaged before being
discharged to the outside of the cell, a process known as exocytosis.
Concentration occurs as structures called condensing vacuoles located
on the periphery of the Golgi complex fill with concentrated protein,
then fuse with one another to form larger secretory granules and
vesicles. Outbound vesicles are given unique membrane compositions,
including high-specificity targeting molecules that can bind only to
receptor molecules located on the appropriate surface of the target
acceptor compartments. A well-known example is the synaptic vesicle
targeting protein synaptobrevin (VAMP 1 and 2) which binds only
to the neuron-specific plasma membrane proteins syntaxin 1A and
1B, thus ensuring proper vesicle docking and fusion at the neuron
cell plasma membrane.1079 In general, the fusion of two distinct
lipid bilayers is energetically unfavorable in the absence of these
specialized targeting proteins.
In some cells, the complementary process of endocytosis is also
important.3452 In endocytosis, the cell ingests extracellular materials by
invaginating the plasma membrane, then budding off vesicles,
vacuoles (phagocytic, pinocytotic, etc.), or “endosomes” to the interior
of the cell from these sites. Endocytosis and exocytosis produce
opposite membrane flows, the former reducing plasma membrane
mass and the latter increasing it via fusion. The net membrane flow
can be rather large in cells that carry out both processes actively. For
instance, in cultured macrophages an amount of membrane equivalent
to the entire surface area of the cell is replaced in ~1800 sec, and
macrophages may ingest ~25% of their volume per hour.996
Storage granules are also important in the cell. For example,
glycogen is the storage polysaccharide of the animal body, also known
as animal starch. It is a polymer of glucose. In many cells, large
individual molecules of polymerized glucose measuring 10-40 nm
in diameter appear as granules. The enzymes needed to carry out
the synthesis and degradation of glycogen (including the synthetic
enzyme glycogen synthase and the degradative enzyme glycogen
phosphorylase) are bound to the surface of these glycogen granules
in a ~5 nm-thick shell. These granules constitute up to 4-6% by
weight of liver cells (~5 million granules), up to 0.7-1% of muscle
cells, with lesser amounts in other cells (typically <105 granules)
and only very small amounts in the brain, and are absent in some
cells.
Another storage vesicle found floating in the cytoplasm is the
lipid droplet containing triglyceride, the main storage form of fatty
acids in cells. In many cells, these insoluble triglycerides coalesce in
the cytosol to form large, anhydrous droplets from 0.2-5 microns
in diameter. In adipocytes, the cells specialized for fat storage, these
droplets can be as large as 80 microns, occupying virtually the
entire cytosol and constituting up to ~99% of the cell’s organic
matter.938
Other intracellular storage vessels include melanin pigment
granules found in certain cells of the skin and hairs; zymogen
(enzyme-containing) granules synthesized in pancreatic cells, then
262 Nanomedicine • Volume I
transported into the small intestine; inflammatory toxins stored as
intracellular granules in eosinophil leukocytes; ferritin molecules
containing cellular iron stores (each ~610-690 kilodalton molecule
is comprised of 24 subunits of 18,500 daltons each, which surround
in an 8-nm-diameter-cavity micellar form some 3000-4500 ferric
atoms);996,3380 and water vacuoles, mucus vesicles, and crystals of
various types. The smallest observed effective hydrodynamic
radius of sonicated phospholipid vesicles is ~10.25 nm independent of
hydrocarbon chain length for synthetic even-numbered 12-18
carbon-chain phosphatidylcholines, and ~10.7 nm for egg-yolk
phosphatidylcholine vesicles.2949
Finally, a related cell component is the vault, numbering in the
thousands in human cells.3381 Vaults are barrel-shaped particles
measuring ~55 nm x 30 nm, assembled from 96 copies of MVP
(major vault protein) plus some integral RNA. Vaults look like pairs of
unfolding flowers, each half having 8 petals attached to a central
ring with a small hook. Vaults were first discovered in the mid-1980s
and their exact function was not yet known in 1998. However, their
structure suggested an ability to open and close as a natural part of
their function in the cell,1410 and their size and shape would be an
almost perfect match to dock at the nuclear pore complex3382 (Section
8.5.4.2), which suggested to some investigators that vaults might
serve to ferry mRNA around the cell.1001,3381
In 1998, the chemical content of individual vesicles was analyzed
regularly using a combination of optical trapping, capillary electrophoresis separation, and laser-induced fluorescence detection.1263
8.5.3.8 Lysosomes and Proteasomes
Lysosomes are Golgi-budded organelles that contain ~40 digestive
enzymes531 capable of degrading all major classes of biological macromolecules — including at least 5 phosphatases, 4 proteases, 2
nucleases, 6 lipases, 12 glycosidases, and an arylsulfatase.939 These
enzymes are needed both to degrade materials brought into the cell
from the outside and to degrade internal cellular structures that are
damaged or are no longer needed. Lysosomal enzymes are acid
hydrolases stored inside the lysosome as small granules 5-8 nm in
diameter—protein aggregates of the hydrolytic enzymes with a pH
optimum around 5, representing over 60% of organelle mass.531
The lysosomes can release these enzymes after fusion with endosomes
containing foreign matter, or to digest dead portions of the cell or
malfunctioning organelles, or to destroy abnormal substances such
as bacteria that enter the cell. An unusual oligosaccharide containing
mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) serves as a recognition marker or
address that targets all such enzymatic proteins to the lysosomes,
and sorting nexins are proteins containing lysosomal targeting codes
using either tyrosine- or di-leucine-based motifs.1032These membrane
markers are readily detectable by nanorobots suitably equipped with
transmembrane sensory tools, although it is important not to
destroy the membrane integrity or to allow leaks (Section 9.4.5.5)
which may alter fluid pH, during any probing. Since intralysosomal
pH is different from the rest of the cell, chemosensors intended to
probe the lysosomal interior may require a different design (or different
detection parameters) than cytosolic chemosensors. In general,
nanorobots can exploit the same biochemical markers that the cell
normally uses to transport organelles to specific locations within
the cell. Organelle surface chemosensing is most valuable for navigation and identification, while chemosensing of the organelle interior is
also important for diagnosis and treatment (Chapter 21).
Lysosomes are spherical or nearly spherical organelles, typically
0.5-1 microns (range 50 nm—3 microns) in diameter. They vary
greatly in appearance and content according to cell type and also in
relation to the physiological state of a particular cell. The lysosome
has a unique 5-6 nm three-layered membrane938 with a special
transmembrane transport protein that uses ATP to pump H+
 into
the organelle lumen, thereby maintaining the internal pH at 5. The
lysosomal membrane also has special docking marker acceptor
proteins that mark a lysosome as a target for fusion with specific
transport vesicles in the cell. Soluble products of digestion can cross
the membrane, exit the organelle, and enter the cytosol for recycling
into the cellular metabolism. Indigestible material slowly accumulates
in the cytoplasm as lipofuscin pigment granules and other residual
bodies. Lysosomes are present in most cells except red cells.
Although it is normally quite stable, the lysosome membrane
can become more fragile when the cell is injured or deprived of
oxygen or when excessive amounts of vitamin A are present. Lysosomes
were once called “suicide sacs” because lysosomal rupture can result
in self-digestion of the cell, a process known as autolysis. However,
it is now known that lysosomes are part of the normal cellular
digestion apparatus relating the process of endocytosis to the processes
of intracellular synthesis, storage, and transport,938 and structural
deterioration of lysosomes does not occur rapidly in ischemic or
post-mortem cells.2019,2020 Most of the digestive enzymes require
the low pH of the lysosomal or peroxisomal vesicles for activation
(just as some proteases require the low pH of the stomach).
In addition to the lysosomal degradation system, there is also a
large number of small cytosolic proteasomes (each having a
700,000-dalton 20S core complex ~11 nm in diameter). This serves
as an extra-lysosomal ATP-driven system for selectively degrading
endogenous ubiquitinated proteins in virtually all human
cells1087,1088,3383 (Chapter 13). Indeed, the ~2 megadalton 26S
proteasome complex (containing 30-40 different proteins) appears
to be the major protease of the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments
of the eukaryotic cell—proteasomal degradation controls the lifetime
of most cellular proteins, including many regulatory proteins, and
generates peptide antigens for presentation by MHC Class I molecules
to CD8+ cytotoxic T cells.2915 Proteasomes are ubiquitous and very
abundant, comprising up to 1% of total cellular protein.1087,2916,2917
The entire 26S complex is 30-44 nm in length.
8.5.3.9 Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes (also called microbodies)1000 are rough ER-budded
organelles typically 0.1-1 microns in diameter.531 Peroxisomes
occur in most cells, but are most prominent in liver and kidney cells
which are active in detoxification. The organelle destroys cytotoxic
chemicals such as hydrogen peroxide, methanol, ethanol, formate,
formaldehyde, nitrites and phenols, as well as D-amino acids which
are not found in proteins and are not recognized by enzymes
involved in the degradation of the more common L-amino acids.
Peroxisomes also catalyze 25-50% of all fatty acid breakdown in
cells (the remainder occurs in the mitochondria). The organelle is a
concentrated source of three oxidative enzymes found in liver cells—
D-amino acid oxidase, urate oxidase (usually present in a distinctive
crystalline core), and catalase (which is up to 40% of total peroxisomal
protein and most of the catalase present in a cell).
Peroxisomes may also protect cells from toxic oxygen levels,3069-3072
since peroxisomal O2 consumption is directly proportional to cellular
oxygen concentration,939 unlike mitochondrial respiration. In case
of excessive O2 levels, peroxisomal respiration is greatly stimulated,
reducing the intracellular oxygen tension.
8.5.3.10 Mitochondria
Mitochondria are the principal chemical energy transducers of
the eukaryotic cell under aerobic conditions.3384 Except for the 10
reactions of the glycolytic pathway, all of the ATP-generating capacity
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 263
ofeukaryotes lies within the mitochondria. Mitochondria are scattered
throughout the cytoplasm in virtually all aerobic cells, with numbers
ranging from ~300/cell for relatively inactive cells like lymphocytes
up to 2000-3000/cell for very active cells such as liver, kidney
tubule and cardiac muscle cells (where mitochondria may occupy
up to 20% of total cell volume).531 Mitochondria are often clustered
within the cell in regions of intense metabolic (hence ATP) demand.
For instance, in muscle cells the mitochondria are organized in rows
between adjacent contractive myofibrils in order to minimize the
required diffusion distance for ATP molecules that are powering
the activity. Similar localization appears in sperm tail flagella, in
cilia, and at the base of kidney tubule cells where exchange with the
blood is most rapid. Except for plant chloroplasts, mitochondria
are unique among organelles in having their own DNA genomes,
ribosomes and tRNAs that are quite different from those found in
the cytoplasm.
After the nucleus, the mitochondrion is the largest organelle in
most animal cells. The typical time-averaged dimensions are roughly
cylindrical, with a 0.5-1.0 micron diameter and a ~3 micron length
(and rarely, up to 10 microns)939—about the size of a bacterium or
modest-sized medical nanodevice. Mitochondria are usually depicted
as tiny kidney-bean- or sausage-shaped organelles, but in living cells
they squirm, flex, elongate, and change shape almost continuously
(Fig. 8.40) in part due to cytoskeletal interactions. Mitochondria
may be shuttled around a cell at up to ~10 microns/sec via dynein
motors453 riding on microtubules (Section 8.5.3.11), bulging the
plasma membrane as they travel.1249
Mitochondria have four functional compartments: outer membrane,
intermembrane space, inner membrane, and the matrix. The outer
surface is a smooth, featureless, 5-6 nm thick membrane938 embedded
with many copies of a transport protein that forms large aqueous
channels through the lipid bilayer, so the membrane is permeable
to all molecules of mass <10,000 daltons (which includes all
metabolites pertinent to mitochondrial function). Since mitochondria
do not grow by fusion with vesicles synthesized elsewhere in the
cell, transfer of phospholipids from the endoplasmic reticulum to
the mitochondrion requires special phospholipid transfer proteins
in the outer membrane (e.g., glycerolphosphate acyltransferase and
monoacyl glycerolphosphate acyltransferase) that can recognize a
specific kind of phospholipid, remove it from a vesicle membrane
and add it to the mitochondrial membrane. Special enzymes such
as monoamine oxidase, acyl-CoA synthetase, and phospholipase A2
are also present.996 The first 32 N-terminal amino acids of cytochrome c1 constitute a fixed “leader sequence” that is recognized as
a matrix targeting signal and allows the tagged molecule admission
through the outer membrane.997Thus, as with other organelles, the
outer coat of the mitochondrion should be immediately and uniquely
recognizable by in cyto nanorobots equipped with suitable
chemosensors (Section 4.2).
The intermembrane space also contains numerous unique proteins,
as for example the essential multispanning carrier (chaperone) proteins
Tim10p and Tim12p.1142
The 5-6 nm thick inner membrane is highly convoluted, forming a
series of ~30 infoldings (each fold ~100 nm wide) known as cristae,
which extend into the inner compartment or matrix, roughly
quintupling the active surface area of the outer membrane (Fig.
8.41). The inner membrane is rich in cardiolipin, a phospholipid
that accounts for 10% of the membrane lipid content and renders
it unusually impermeable to most solutes. The inner membrane also
contains a variety of special transport proteins that make it selectively permeable to those particular small molecules that are metabolized by mitochondrial enzymes concentrated in the matrix
space,531 such as the integral membrane proteins Tim17, Tim 23,
and Tim22p.1142 All of these membrane-specific proteins are readily
detectable by nanorobots that are extending manipulators tipped
with appropriately configured chemical sensors through the intermembrane space (Section 9.4.5).
The inner membrane is the locale of electron transport and ATP
synthesis. A single mitochondrion has ~10,000 large protein F1 (ATP
synthase) complexes embedded in its inner membrane, randomly
distributed and typically measuring ~10-20 nm in diameter.939These
integral proteins freely diffuse laterally within the inner membrane.
Mobility is high—protein complexes collected at one end of a
membrane by externally imposed electrophoretic forces return to a
random distribution in just a few seconds.939
The prominence of cristae is correlated with the relative metabolic
activity of the cell or tissue. Heart, kidney, and muscle cells have
high respiratory activity levels, and their mitochondria have correspondingly large numbers of prominent cristae.531 The number of cristae
is three times greater in the mitochondria of cardiac muscle cells
than in hepatic mitochondria, reflecting the greater demand for ATP
in heart tissue. The cristae of mitochondria in different cell types
are not only different in number and deepness, but also in basic
morphology (Fig. 8.42).531,3385-3388
The interior of the mitochondrion is filled with a semifluid
gel-like matrix that contains a concentrated mixture of hundreds of
different enzymes related to aerobic cellular respiration and oxidation,
plus several identical copies of the mitochondrial DNA genome,
special mitochondrial ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymes
required to express the mitochondrial genes. The mitochondrial
genome3073 consists of a circular DNA molecule of ~11 million
daltons, coding for about a dozen polypeptides. It has 16,569 base
pairs and a contour length of ~5 microns. Mitochondria are
self-replicating organelles (with the help of cell-supplied proteins
Fig. 8.40. Mitochondrial shape changes in living cells (redrawn from
Alberts et al531).
264 Nanomedicine • Volume I
and lipids). When cellular requirements for ATP increase, mitochondria pinch in half (a process called fission) to increase their number,
then both halves regrow to the former full size.940
Mitochondria also are sometimes found as extended reticular
networks3177-3179 which are extremely dynamic in growing cells (such
as mammalian fibroblasts), with tubular sections dividing in half,
branching, and fusing to create a fluid tubular web.3179,3180
8.5.3.11 Cytoskeleton
In addition to the membrane-enclosed organelles described above,
the cytoplasm of most cells is packed with filaments of various sizes
collectively called the cytoskeleton. Much as the bony skeleton
occupies ~11% of the human body volume (Section 8.2.4), the
cytoskeleton likewise occupies ~11% of cell volume (Table 8.17).
This elaborate three-dimensional webbing of filaments and tubules
forms a highly structured yet dynamic matrix that extends throughout
the cytoplasm, stretching from the nuclear envelope to the plasma
membrane. The cytoskeleton helps to establish and maintain shape
and plays important roles in cell movement, cell division, metabolism
and growth,1426-1429 and even gene expression by accepting mechanical
signals (e.g., through membrane proteins such as the integrins)
originating in the extracellular matrix and transducing them into
the nucleus.942 Cellular shape appears to be maintained by an
architecture known as tensional integrity or “tensegrity”—a system
that achieves mechanical stability because of the way compressive
and tensional forces are distributed and balanced within the
cell.1020,1021 Forcing cells to adopt different shapes causes the cells
to switch between different active genetic programs.718,1425
The cytoskeleton also serves as a framework for positioning,
anchoring, and actively moving organelles and vesicles within the
cytoplasm, for muscle contraction and the beating of cilia (Section
9.3.1.1) and flagella (Section 6.3.4.2), and for chromosomal
movements. It has been estimated that up to 80% of unbound
cytoplasmic proteins are not freely diffusible but are associated in
some way with the cytoskeleton, and up to 20-40% of cytoplasmic
water may be bound to the filaments and tubules of the cytoskeleton.939
The most radical example of cytoskeletal dynamics may be the
complete remodeling of the cellular microtubular array during
replication—from a network radiating throughout the cell in
interphase to the compact bipolar mitotic spindle during mitosis.
There are five recognized classes of filaments, grouped according to
their diameter and by the types of protein they contain. In order of
size, starting with the thinnest, they are
1. superfine filaments,
2. microfilaments,
3. intermediate filaments,
4. muscle thick filaments, and
5. microtubules.
Microfilaments and microtubules can be rapidly assembled and
disassembled, allowing a cell to modify its cytoskeletal framework
according to changing requirements. The other filament types, once
assembled, are less readily disassembled.
A. Superfine Filaments — Superfine filaments are short segments
measuring 2-4 nm in diameter and up to 100 nm in length. Superfine
filaments such as plectin1194,3389 serve to interconnect other filaments
and microtubules, stabilize the nucleus,3391 regulate actin dynamics,3392
and also provide the means by which the membranes of organelles
may be attached to stable or moving elements of the cytoskeleton.938,3389,3390
B. Microfilaments — Microfilaments are the smallest of the
major cytoskeletal components, measuring 5-7 nm in diameter and
up to several microns in length. They are F-actin polymers of the
contractile monomer protein G-actin, a single polypeptide consisting
Fig. 8.41. Mitochondrial structure (redrawn from Vander, Sherman,
and Luciano,866 and from Becker and Deamer939).
Fig. 8.42. Morphologically distinct mitochondrial cristae (from rat
tissues; redrawn from Alberts et al531).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 265
of 375 amino acid residues with a molecular weight of ~42,000.
Actin is the most abundant protein in most cells, usually comprising
more than 5% of the total cellular protein.939 Polymerization at the
“plus” end and depolymerization at the “minus” end occur spontaneously, driven by local G-actin concentration. This produces a
treadmilling action, wherein a given actin monomer is incorporated
at the “plus” end, transfers slowly along the microfilament from one
end to the other, and finally is lost by depolymerization at the
“minus” end.939 Assembly speed for microfilaments of the actin
cytoskeleton is 0.1-1 micron/sec.942Tensile failure strength of a single
strand is ~108 pN,362 while the compressive load force or “stall force”
applied during polymerization by a single actin fiber is typically
~10 pN.1203
Microfilaments make up a major portion of all cell cytoskeletons
and are best known for their role in the contractile fibrils of muscle
cells. They can form connections with the plasma membrane and
thereby influence locomotion, amoeboid movement, and cytoplasmic
streaming. They produce the cleavage furrows that divide the cytoplasm of cells after chromosomes have been separated by the spindle
fibers during mitosis. Microfilaments also help develop and maintain
cell shape by acting as tensile elements in the cellular tensegrity
structure, pulling the plasma membrane and all of the cell’s internal
constituents toward the nucleus at the core.1021 Microfilaments also
conduct mechanical signals throughout the cell at propagation speeds
of 100-1200 m/sec, allowing 0.01-2 Hz signals to cross a cell in
2-20 nanosec.1202
Most cells have a dense network of subsurface microfilaments
called the cell cortex, which includes actin-binding peripheral proteins
such as spectrin (in erythrocytes) or filamin and vinculin (in fibroblasts) just below the plasma membrane. In the case of the red cell,
the membrane skeleton (Fig. 8.43) is a highly organized
two-dimensional triangulated network of actin oligomers tethered
to spectrin tetramer filaments interconnecting ~70,000 nodes1136
or microfilament junctional complexes comprising an equal number
of triangular ~50 nm-wide meshes1126 (mean mesh size 3000-4800
nm2
).3612
The cell cortex confers structural rigidity on the cell surface and
facilitates shape changes and bulk movement. In some cells,
microfilaments are ordered into long parallel bundles called stress
fibers, which may span the entire length of the cell. Stress fibers also
comprise the core of microvilli. Each cell has its own
arrangement of microfilaments, thus no two cells are exactly alike.940
Indeed, the microfilament network itself may form a complete
tensegrity substructure within the larger cytoskeletal network.1021
C. Intermediate Filaments — Tough, insoluble intermediate
filaments (IFs) have a diameter of 8-12 nm with a mean intertubule
spacing of perhaps ~50-100 nm. They are the most stable of the
cytoskeletal elements, not being subject to constant de-/
re-polymerization, with a tensile failure strength of 20 nN per fiber
(Table 9.3). With their high tensile strength and comparative positional stability, IFs act as internal guy wires to resist mechanical
stress on the cell940 and thus are regarded as a scaffold supporting
the entire cytoskeletal framework, with polysomal ribosomes located
at IF junction control nodes (Fig. 8.44). IFs also have a
tension-bearing role in some cells, as intermediate filaments are most
extensively developed in those regions of cells most subject to
mechanical stress. Another specific function of IFs is to maintain
the position of the nucleus within the cell. Intermediate filaments
form a ring around the nucleus with branches extending outward
through the cytoplasm, and possibly extending downward into the
pores of the nuclear envelope (Section 8.5.4.2) to connect with the
nuclear cortex (Section 8.5.4.3). Intermediate filaments constitute
~1% of total protein, although in some cells (e.g., epidermal
keratinocytes, neurons) IFs may represent up to 85% of the total
protein of fully differentiated cells.1543
In contrast to microtubules and microfilaments, intermediate
filaments differ in their composition from one tissue to another.
Figs. 8.43. Above, a schematic of microfilaments in the erythrocyte
cell cortex; below, schematic of microfilaments in the erythrocyte
cell cortex (redrawn from Schmidt et al1126 and Becker and
Deamer939).
Fig. 8.44. Cytoskeletal network in the cell (redrawn from Loewy et
al938 and Marieb940).
266 Nanomedicine • Volume I
The known classes of IF protein (based on biochemical and
immunological criteria) include the keratins of which there are at
least 15 different varieties in each of the acidic and basic/neutral
subclasses (in the tonofilaments of epithelial cells); vimentin, which
is found in fibroblasts, connective tissue and other cells of mesenchymal origin; desmin, in muscle cells; glial fibrillary acidic (GFA)
protein, in glial cells; neurofilament (NF) protein, present in the
neurofilaments of nerve cells; and nuclear lamins A, B and C, which
are found in the nuclear cortex of all cells.939 Most cells contain at
least two different types of IF proteins: the three lamins in the
nucleus, plus the cytoplasmic IF protein appropriate to the specific
cell type. Because of this tissue specificity, cells from different tissues
can be distinguished almost solely on the basis of the IF proteins
present3393—intermediate filament typing via immunofluorescence
microscopy is a useful diagnostic tool in detecting cancer and prenatal
birth defects.3394-3397 In cyto nanorobots can use this same information to continuously verify the cell type in which they are resident.
D. Muscle Thick Filaments — Muscle thick filaments, ~15 nm in
diameter and composed of the very large contractile protein myosin,
are found mainly in striated muscle cells and occasionally in the
cortex of nonmuscle cells.3398-3400 Myosin molecules not in filament
form are also present in many, if not most, other cells where they
interact with microfilaments to produce local forces and movements.
E. Microtubules — Microtubules are straight hollow cylinders
with an outer diameter of 25 nm and an inner diameter of 15 nm.
They vary greatly in length. Some are less than 200 nm long, while
others, particularly in nerve cells (where they provide the framework that maintains the cell’s cylindrical shape), can be as long as
25 microns. Mean intertubule spacing is at least 200-300 nm, with
a minimum radius of curvature of ~0.2 microns.1437 Each microtubule
is composed of a helical arrangement of the αβ-tubulin heterodimer
protein, with 13 tubulin subunits in each rotation of the tight
helix.1092 The uniform orientation of the tubulin molecules confers
an inherent polarity on the microtubule. Placed in a tubulin-rich
environment, the “plus” end of the tubulin polymer (β-tubulin)
will elongate much more rapidly than the “minus” end
(α-tubulin).1124 In the living cell, the ends of the microtubules farthest
away from the center of the cell are always the “plus” ends. Microtubules radiate out as lacelike threads toward the periphery of the
cell from a microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) near the
nucleus.939The best-known MTOC is the centrosome, which consists
of granular material surrounding two centrioles (Fig. 8.36). Other
examples of MTOCs include the kinetochore and the poles of the
mitotic spindle.
Microtubules are the most rigid of the cytoskeletal filaments and
thus often serve as the principal cytoskeletal organizers and backbone
elements (Fig. 8.44), providing (along with the ECM) the compressive elements of the cellular tensegrity structure. Tensile failure
strength is ~1000 pN per fiber (Table 9.3). The flexural rigidity of
individual microtubules has been directly measured as κrigid = 3.4 x
10-23 N-m2
,
1468 which is higher than the rigidity of actin filaments.
What does this mean? For an elastic rod of length L attached to a
wall by a pivot about which the rod is completely free to rotate, the
magnitude of the critical buckling force of the rod is:642,1468

F ~
L buckle
2
rigid
2
π κ {Eqn. 8.6}
Hence a 1-micron long microtubule will not begin to buckle until
an axial load of Fbuckle  340 pN is applied.
Microtubules define and maintain the overall shape and
architecture of the cell, confer polarity on the cell, and determine
the distribution of the microfilaments and intermediate filaments.
By providing a radiating system of fibers to guide the movement of
vesicles and other organelles, microtubules also contribute to the
spatial disposition and directional movement of subcellular structures.
For example, microtubules serve as “tracks” for the outward movement
of the endoplasmic reticulum in growing cells, and microtubules
transport membrane-bound vesicles in both directions along the
axons connecting the body of the nerve cell with the synaptic knobs
(axonal transport) at a typical speed of ~2 microns/sec.939 Particles
easily switch from one microtubule to another intersecting one during
transport.1448
The structure immediately responsible for the separation of the
chromosomes, the spindle fibers, is composed of microtubules, as
are the organelles (the centrioles) that generate the spindle fibers at
the time of cell division. (Each cell has two centrioles, solid structures
composed of microtubules. Prior to cell division, the centrioles
replicate and then produce the intracellular architectural skeleton
called the mitotic apparatus that guides the cell through mitosis.)
Spontaneous spatial pattern formation from oscillating microtubules
has been observed,1071,1073 and cytoskeletal rearrangements appear
to be biochemically regulated.1083
The microtubule elongation rate in cultured fibroblasts has been
measured as ~0.06 microns/sec.1423 The turnover time for the entire
microtubular apparatus has been estimated as ~900 sec (0.25
hour),1423 with a specific power output of ~0.6 watts/m3 averaged
over the entire array.1424 Not all cytoplasmic microtubules
immediately participate in this rapid turnover during interphase—
about 10% of the population seems to remain stable for at least 2
hours.1423 Dynamic instability causes microtubule shortening in
human monocytes, in the range of ~260 dimers/sec1446 or ~0.15
microns/sec.1447 Depolymerizing microtubules can drive kinetochore
movements towards the minus end at ~0.5 microns/sec, exerting
forces of up to ~100 pN.1593
Superfine filaments connect microtubules with each other, with
intermediate filaments, and with adjacent organelles.1439,1440 The
filaments extend from the microtubular surface and prevent direct
contact with other cellular structures.1441 This forms a narrow
exclusion zone around microtubules that is devoid of other structures,
and often appears as a clear halo1442 with a radius from ~10 nm in
insect cells1443 up to ~50 nm in neurons.1444 High molecular weight
microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) define zones of exclusion
around microtubules and may help maintain the observed spacing
between microtubules and cell organelles.1445
8.5.3.12 Cytonavigational Issues
Cytonavigational requirements are strongly mission-driven. A
nonexhaustive list of mission classes might include:
1. examination or modification of the plasma membrane or cell
cortex, including chemical testing for toxins or poisons in cell
receptors and transport channels;
2. cytosolic chemical or pathogenic assay, chemical injection or
extraction, or other selective cytosolic modification;
3. biocellular messaging or eavesdropping using chemical,
mechanical, or other means;
4. organelle counting, dimensional measuring, and general
cytocartography;
5. circumorganelle chemical assay;
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 267
6. organelle-specific surface membrane analysis or intraplasmic
chemical assay;
7. dynamic functional or structural testing of cellular components;
8. sampling, diagnosis, chemoinjection, replacement or
repair operations to be performed upon an individual organelle
or cytocomponent located at a specific cellular physical address;
9. cytoassembly or structural editing;
10. establishment of direct functional control over some or all of
normal cellular functions, including metabolism, secretion, and
mitotic cycling;
11. comprehensive cellular reconstruction;
12. long-term cytoplasmic materials or equipment storage;
13. sentinel or cytodefensive functions; or
14. activities involving the nucleus (Section 8.5.4). Each of these
mission classes has very specific, and often quite different,
navigational requirements.
Medical nanorobots can certainly undertake many useful tasks
without physically entering the cell, relying solely upon diffusion,
transport via cellular pumps, endocytosis and pinocytosis, or even
nanoinjectors or manipulator appendages inserted through the
plasma membrane (Section 9.4.5) while the nanorobot remains
securely anchored outside the cell. However, it is well-known that
motile entities are capable of entering and navigating the interiors
of living cells for long periods of time without ill effect. For
example, one description848 from early microscopic investigations
included the following observation: “...lymphocytes entered the cells
and circulated inside them for hours at a time. This odd relationship of
lymphocytes to other cells, sometimes moving around them,
sometimes entering them, they termed ‘emperipolesis’.”
(Emperipolesis3286-3293 is a rarely observed and still poorly understood
phenomenon that may only occur in pathological conditions.)
Micron-scale bacterial pathogens that invade nonphagocytic cells,
once free in the cytoplasm, are propelled “harmlessly” through the
cytosol via continuous cytoskeleton-linked actin polymerization1012
(Section 9.4.6). While delivery of treatment “packages” to extracellular
spaces may be an early use of medical nanorobotics, subsequent
development will allow nanorobots to enter and operate inside the
cell. Ultimate applications would permit delicate sensing and repair
of DNA or organelles (Chapter 21).
The interior of a cell is a unique and intuitively unfamiliar
environment. Figure 8.36, drawn primarily for conceptual clarity,
erroneously makes the cell appear spacious and relatively empty. In
reality, cellular components are fairly closely packed. Even though
cells may consist of up to 70% water, only some of this is bulk water
and the cytosol more closely resembles a proteinaceous crystal (Section
8.5.3.3). The mean separation of adjacent organelles (of all types) is
<1 micron, roughly the size of the nanorobot itself. Forward travel
is further impeded by the presence of a dense cytoskeletal network.
This includes sheetlike ~30 nm meshes of microfilaments intertwined
and bonded with peripheral proteins comprising the cell cortex,
plus additional three-dimensional networks of intermediate filaments
(~100 nm mesh) and microtubules (~300 nm mesh) throughout
the body of the cell (Fig. 8.44). There may be only a few
multi-micron-scale “freely swimmable” spaces for nanorobots within
the cell.
A medical nanorobot bears about the same size relationship to a
cell as a human body bears to a swimming pool. Consider this fanciful
analogy to a common macroscale experience, imagining a
“nanorobot” of roughly human size: The subsurface robot does not
find itself traversing a large swimming pool of water, encountering
an occasional submerged obstacle. Rather, it finds itself crawling
through a swimming pool mostly filled with thick-skinned water
balloons separated by its own width, or slightly less, of fluid. The
water balloons are of many different sizes and shapes but average
an equivalent volume as the nanorobot itself, with almost all of
the balloons embedded in and loosely tethered to a dense
three-dimensional multilevel webbing of threads, strings, cords, and
1-cm gauge ropes arranged in a progressive semirandom 1-10 cm
mesh. To employ a slightly different and even more imprecise
metaphor, navigating the interior of a cell may more closely
resemble hacking through a dense jungle than strolling in an open
garden.
Given the tight spacing of the multilevel cytoskeletal webbing,
it will be almost impossible for a micron-scale medical nanorobot
to enter cells and freely navigate therein without disrupting the
cytoskeletal framework that lies across its path. Some disruption
cannot be avoided even if useful nanodevices or their extensible
appendages can be metamorphically compressed as narrow as ~100
nm in width (Section 5.3.1.2). However, cytoskeletal disruption
can be minimized by employing active and continuous breach-sealing
polymerization protocols during passage (Section 9.4.6). The
nanorobot must also avoid applying excessive forces to the
cytoskeleton, as these forces could transmit mechanically-mediated
signal cascades into the nucleus and activate unwanted stress responses
via regulated genetic circuits.1956 Some details regarding
cytopenetration (Section 9.4.5), in cyto locomotion (Section 9.4.6),
and biocompatible nanorobot surfaces3234 (Chapter 15) are presented
elsewhere.
How can a nanorobot determine its intracellular position? If a
high-resolution microtransponder network (Section 8.3.3) has been
installed in the surrounding tissue, in vivo nanorobots can acoustically
fix their cytographic position to within ~3 microns, although a
gigahertz acoustic chirp system may allow localized accuracies as
close as ~100 nm in some cases (Section 8.5.4.7). A 3-micron grid
size divides a 20-micron cell volume into ~300 distinguishable voxels
with each voxel encompassing an average of ~10 individual major
organelles.
Because of the close spacing of cellular organelles, a micron-scale
nanorobot typically may be in direct physical contact with at least
one organelle at all times. The nanorobot can uniquely identify any
organelle type based on membrane composition, intraplasmic
biochemistry, or physical structure, and can also estimate which
additional organelles may be in the neighborhood based on
peri-organelle chemogradients. In the case of the nucleus or the
ER, where there may be only one organelle of that type per cell,
organelle detection provides relative positional localization in the
radial dimension (although the ER has multiple layers). In the angular
dimensions, and in the case of multiple organelles, cytoskeletal
network topology provides additional positional and orientational
cues. The circumnuclear ring of intermediate filaments and the
microtubule-organizing centers (MTOCs) have already been mentioned. Center-to-periphery orientation is readily established by
comparing the net polarity of the local microtubule array with a
previously assembled gross map of cellular microtubular topology.
Dead reckoning (Section 8.3.1) may also be used to estimate transit
positions and to create internal maps accurate to ~100 nm, the typical
internodal separation of the junctions of the intermediate fibers (the
most persistent component of the cytoskeletal network). The mean
separation of cytoplasmic free ribosomes is also ~100 nm. However,
268 Nanomedicine • Volume I
even positional localization as crude as ~1 micron resolution will
uniquely locate all individual major organelles within the cytoplasm.
This may be sufficient for most purposes, since random hydrodynamic
flows induced by thermal fluctuations inside a cell have velocities of
~10 microns/sec in a time range of ~10 millisec with a characteristic length of ~1 micron.1069
A volumetric cytographic map using (100 nm)3 voxels requires
8 million 8-bit voxels or ~64 megabits of memory. A 1 micron3
nanorobot moving at ~1 micron/sec would require ~8000 sec to
volumetrically survey the entire interior of a 20-micron cell using
an efficient nonoverlapping scanning pattern, or ~300 sec to scan a
region having the same volume as the nucleus. A volumetric map would
allow computation of the shortest path to the plasma membrane in
order to exit the cell quickly and with minimum disruption. Such
maps might help the nanorobot to identify the axodendritic polarity of
a neuron, locate the nucleus or a specific part of a membrane—for
instance, a part of the membrane that is connected via intercellular
junctions to adjacent cells, or which is adjacent to bone or digestive
juices. Volumetric maps could also allow the nanorobot to return to
the exact site of unwanted natural deposits (e.g., lipofuscin) or to
sites where foreign objects are lodged, although long-term map
stability is problemmatical.
The cytoplasmic membranes present inside a 20-micron tissue
cell have a total surface area of ~180,000 micron2
, plus another
~280,000 micron2 of cytoskeletal fiber surfaces (Table 8.17).
Assuming 8-bit pixels, the totality of internal cellular surfaces
could be instantaneously described using 1 micron2 pixels with a
4 megabit map, or with (100 nm)2 pixels using a 400 megabit map
(requiring ~0.02 micron3 of hydrofluorocarbon memory tape).
However, high-resolution cytographic surface survey maps are not
as useful because of their short half-lives. Membrane lipids and transmembrane protein molecules have lateral diffusion speeds (Section
8.5.3.2) averaging ~3 microns/sec and ~0.02 micron/sec, respectively;
giving a 0.3-50 sec half-life for a 1 micron2 resolution surface map.
Surface folds and other gross morphological features on the nuclear
envelope, the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi complex may
have half lives of ~103
-105 sec, so maps of these features may have
modest operational utility but still will have minimal archival utility. In
any case, many malfunctions in these three organelles may require biochemical rather than mechanical interventions (Chapter 21).
For multiple-copy organelles, statistical sampling to acquire census
data may provide the most useful information. Semipermanent
structures such as mitochondria may be examined one by one to
measure size and number density, to verify biochemical composition,
and to test functionality. If a population of N cellular objects is
independently and randomly sampled one by one by a population
of Nnano in cyto nanorobots, taking a time texam for each
examination, then the probability that any one object has not yet
been examined after n selections is px = (1 - N-1)
(n Nnano)
, the total
examination time T = n texam / Nnano, and the average number of
times the same object is examined npo = n Nnano / N. For a cell
containing N = 1000 mitochondria, mean travel distance between
these organelles is Xtravel ~ 2 microns in a 20-micron cell, or ttravel
~ 2 sec travel time at a travel speed of ~1 micron/sec. Conservatively
taking texam ~ 10 sec, then reducing the probability of
nonexamination of any mitochondrion to px = N-1 = 0.1% requires
n ~ 7,000 examinations or an average of npo = 7 examinations per
mitochondrion, and requires T = 70,000 sec ~ 19 hours to complete all
the examinations using a single in cyto nanorobot (Nnano = 1). A
census sampling that reaches only px = 50% completeness requires
just n ~ 700 examinations, npo = 0.7 examinations per mitochondrion
and T = 7000 sec ~ 2 hours using one nanorobot. An npo ~ 1%
sampling of a population of 106 cytoplasmic free ribosomes requires
n = 10,000 examinations and T ~ 10,000 sec ~ 3 hours assuming
texam ~ 1 sec (ttravel ~ 0.2 sec) for a single in cyto nanorobot. These
times compare well even against the rapid multiplication rate of
proliferating tissue cells (e.g., human embryonal cells, ~24 hours).
Post-examination individual target object tagging (e.g., using anchored
messenger molecules) without physical sequestration reduces texam
only slightly but does not reduce ttravel, hence has no significant
impact on T. Note that successive mitochondrial samplings will
generally be independent if Xtravel (~2 microns) >> ∆Xdiffuse; from
Eqn. 3.1, mitochondrial diffusion displacement is of order ∆Xdiffuse
~ 20 nm, taking τ = texam ~ 10 sec, R ~ 1 micron, and η ∼ 10 kg/
m-sec (in cyto, at 310 K; Table 9.4), hence the independence
condition is usually satisfied.
8.5.4 Nucleography
Nucleography is the “geography” of the cell nucleus. The nucleus,
5-8 microns in diameter for a 20 micron tissue cell and up to 10
microns for a fibroblast cell, is the largest cellular organelle and the
only one that is voluminous enough, in theory, to admit a
micron-scale medical nanorobot into its interior. The nucleus is
usually a large spherical or ovoid structure surrounded by its own
nuclear membrane, although its shape generally conforms to the
shape of the cell. For example, if a cell is elongated, the nucleus may
be extended as well.940
Fig. 8.45. Endoplasmic reticulum surrounds the nucleus (redrawn
from Alberts et al531).
Fig. 8.46. Nuclear pores and the perinuclear space (redrawn from
Becker and Deamer939).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 269
Almost all cells contain a single nucleus, whose primary function is
the storage and expression of genetic information. However, a few
cell types have multiple nuclei of similar size, such as skeletal muscle
cells, osteoclasts, megakaryocytes, and some hepatocytes.935 A few
cell types have no nucleus, such as red blood cells, platelets, keratinized
squamous epidermal cells, and lens fibers.
In 1998 the finer details of nuclear structure were just beginning
to be understood.1529Thus the following discussion of nucleography
must be regarded as a very tentative work in progress.
8.5.4.1 Nuclear Envelope
The nuclear envelope enclosing the nucleus is a lipid bilayer similar
in structure to the cell membrane, except that it is a double-layered
membrane which is topologically more convenient for dissolution
during mitosis and subsequent reassembly from vesicles. Each of
the two lipid bilayer membranes is 7-8 nm thick. The outer nuclear
membrane is occasionally continuous with the rough endoplasmic
reticulum and is almost entirely surrounded by it (Fig. 8.45). Like
the rough ER, the outer membrane is often studded on its outer
surface with ribosomes involved in protein synthesis.939 Intermediate filaments extend outward from the outer membrane into
the cytoplasm, anchored on the other end to the plasma membrane or
other organelles, thus positioning the nucleus firmly within the cell
and increasing its mechanical stiffness almost tenfold.942
The perinuclear space (or perinuclear cisterna) between the two
membranes ranges in width from 10-70 nm but is usually a gap of
20-40 nm. This fluid-filled compartment is continuous with the
cisternae of the rough ER (Fig. 8.46), thus providing one possible
avenue for transporting substances between the nucleus and different
parts of the cytoplasmic compartment.
The nuclear envelope disassembles at the onset of mitosis and is
reassembled at the end of mitosis.1140
8.5.4.2 Nuclear Pore Complexes
The most distinctive feature of the nuclear envelope is the presence
of numerous nuclear pores (Fig. 8.46), small cylindrical channels
with eightfold symmetry that extend through both membranes and
provide direct contact between cytoplasm and nucleoplasm.1003,3403-3405 Each pore complex marks a point of fusion
between the inner and outer membranes. Elements of the cytoskeleton
appear to be attached to many pores, possibly allowing direct
mechanical regulation of pore activity.3406,3407
Each nuclear pore complex is a huge multimolecular assemblage
measuring 70-90 nm in diameter, with a mass of 125 million daltons,
~34 times the size of a ribosome. Up to 100 different nucleoporin
protein molecules make up the structure.1004 Early experiments with
passive gold particles showed that cytoplasmic particles with diameters
of 5-6 nm passed into the nucleus in ~200 sec, those with diameters
of 9-10 nm took ~104 sec, but particles larger than 15 nm didn’t
seem to enter at all.939 Closer examination has revealed that the
pores are actually large enough to allow the passage of substrates as
large as 23-26 nm,1003,1004 but this is still much too narrow for
nanorobots or their flexible processes to pass through without
damaging the mechanism. The nuclear localization sequence (NLS),
a molecular tag consisting of 1-2 short sequences of amino acids,
marks cytoplasmic proteins for active transport through the nuclear
pores. Small (~40 nm) arm-like import receptors (cytoplasmic filaments)
ringing the mouth of the pore bind to a protein cargo tagged with
an NLS, then flex toward the pore to shove the cargo into the
mouth.1264,3408,3409
The density of pores across the surface of the nuclear envelope
varies greatly, depending mainly on cell type and the amount of
Fig. 8.47. Schematic of chromatin distribution in the nucleus (redrawn
from Alberts et al531).
RNA being exported to the cytoplasm. Values range from 3-4 pores/
micron2 in some white cells up to 50 pores/micron2 in oocytes and
a theoretical maximum density of 60 pores/micron2
.
939 A typical
~20 micron human cell has 2000-4000 pores embedded in its nuclear
surface,1004 a mean density of 10-20 pores/micron2
. Pore structures
may protrude at most ~100 nm into the nucleoplasmic space.
8.5.4.3 Nuclear Cortex
The nuclear cortex is an electron-dense layer of intermediate
filaments (composed of the nuclear lamins common to most cell
types) on the nucleoplasmic side of the inner nuclear membrane.1004
The cortex, also called the nuclear lamina or karyoskeleton, is up to
30-40 nm thick in some cells but is difficult to detect in others.939
Its proteinaceous fibers are arranged in whorls that may serve to
funnel materials to the nuclear pores for export to the cytoplasm.
These fibers may also be involved in pore formation. The nuclear
cortex helps to determine nuclear shape, and also binds to specific
sites on chromatin, thereby guiding the interactions of chromatin
(Fig. 8.47) with the nuclear envelope.531 Chromatin binding sites
on the nuclear cortex avoid the immediate vicinity of nuclear pores
to ensure unobstructed passage of materials through the pores.531
8.5.4.4 Nucleoplasm and Chromatin
The nucleoplasm is the semifluid matrix in the interior of the
nucleus. It contains some condensed but mostly extended chromatin
(called heterochromatin and euchromatin, respectively), as well as a
structural nuclear matrix of nonchromatin (mostly protein) material
(Section 8.5.4.6). The chromatin represents chromosomes as they
exist between cell divisions. Chromosomes assume a highly condensed
(compact) state as the cell prepares to divide, but after mitosis most
of the chromosomes relax into a highly extended state. The nucleus
of the human cell contains 46 chromosomes of varying lengths, in
23 pairs. Each of these in turn are composed principally of a single
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecule. The DNA contains the
genes of the cell, and all ~100,000 genes are represented, though
not expressed, in each nucleated cell. The nucleosol, or fluid com-
270 Nanomedicine • Volume I
ponent of the nucleoplasm, contains salts, nutrients, and other
needed biochemicals. A number of different granules are also
present.938
During interphase (e.g., between cell divisions), individual
chromosomes occupy compact, discrete territories within the
nucleus that may range up to 4 microns in diameter (Fig.
8.47).2464-2467,3410-3417The structure and location of these territories is
specific for both cell type and mitotic stage,3412,3413 and may be
arranged in the same spatial order as is found in the wheel-shaped ring
aggregate known as the chromosome rosette at the time of mitotic
prometaphase.1060 It has been proposed that active genes are preferentially localized to the periphery of the chromosome territories; RNA
templates would be preferentially produced at the surfaces of these
territories and then shed into interchromosomal domain channels for
further processing and transport.1529 Others have argued against
this.3414 But knowledge of any such spatial orderings, which was
woefully incomplete in 1998, might permit intranuclear nanorobots
to approximate their position inside the nucleus once the locations
of three or more specific chomosomes have been definitively established. The diameter of a territory Dterritory ~ Dnucleus (cchromosome /
cgenome)
1/3 ~ 3 microns, where cchromosome is chromosome size and cgenome
is genome size, both measured in base pairs, and Dnucleus is the diameter
of the nucleus.2464
Note, however, that these territories are not rigid. Changes in
the relative positions of chromosomal territories often occur at
~0.3-0.4 nm/sec, and intraterritorial movement and flexing of
subchromosomal foci measuring 400-800 nm in diameter have also
been observed.1529,3415 Both cytoplasm and nucleoplasm may contain
numerous as yet undiscovered intricate substructures that could
provide many new navigational aids. An important task for early
nanomedicine-oriented research will be to fully explore and elucidate
this fine structure, and to determine whether or not it is stable
enough to be relied upon in any way for intracellular navigation.
In its most relaxed state, chromatin resembles a network of bumpy
threads weaving their way through the nucleoplasm. Chromatin is
composed of roughly equal amounts of negatively charged DNA
(comprising the chromosomes) and globular histone proteins (basic
proteins which carry a positive charge at the normal pH found in
the cell).938 Nucleosomes, the fundamental units of chromatin, are
spherical clusters of eight histone proteins, connected like beads on
a string by a DNA molecule that winds around each of them. The
average cell nucleus contains 25 million nucleosomes, also called
histone octamers. Each nucleosome is encircled by 146 base pairs
of DNA. Nucleosomes have a mass of 206,000 daltons. About half
of nucleosome mass is protein and half is DNA. Each human
chromosome contains DNA with an average contour length of ~75
mm. (See Chapter 20 for more details.)
8.5.4.5 Nucleolus
The largest and most prominent “nuclear organelle” is the
nucleolus, a highly coiled structure associated with numerous particles
but not surrounded by a membrane.1141 The nucleolus is a
ribosome-manufacturing machine. Assembly of precursor ribosomal
subunits within the nucleolus requires ~1800 sec, while the complete
assembly of a large ribosomal subunit (needing only protein to make
a completed ribosome) takes ~3600 sec.531
The nucleolus is composed of DNA, RNA, and proteins. It also
has a granular component (each granule ~150 nm thick) and a fibrillar
component, and a variable internal structure.1141 The granular
component consists of ~15-nm particles that are ribosomal subunits in
the process of maturation. The fibrillar component consists of rRNA
molecules that have already become associated with proteins to form
fibrils with a thickness of ~5 nm. The size of the nucleolus correlates with its level of activity. In cells characterized by a high rate of
protein synthesis and hence by the need for many ribosomes, the
nucleolus can occupy 20-25% of nuclear volume (3-5 micron diameter in a 20-micron cell), mostly comprised of the granular component. In less active cells, the nucleolus is much smaller—as small
as 0.5 micron in a mature lymphocyte.1141 Nucleoli are frequently
located at or near the nuclear envelope, adhering directly to the
Fig. 8.48. Schematic of human nucleolus structure (redrawn from
Alberts et al531).
Fig. 8.49. Schematic topology of nuclear transcript domains (after
Carter et al1135).
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 271
nuclear lamina or attaching to it by a pedicle. In nuclei having a
centrally located nucleolus, the nuclear envelope is folded to form a
nucleolar canal that is in direct contact with the nucleolus.1141
Most human nuclei contain only one nucleolus, except for liver
cell nuclei which may contain more than one nucleolus935 and
cultured HeLa (cancer) cells which may have up to six.1141 The
number of nucleoli in a eukaryotic cell nucleus normally is determined
by the number of chromosomes with secondary constrictions, or
nucleolus organizer regions (NORs). The human genome contains
five NORs per haploid chromosome set, or 10 NORs per diploid
nucleus, each located near the tip of a chromosome. However, instead
of 10 separate nucleoli, the typical human nucleus contains a single
large nucleolus representing the fusion of loops of chromatin from
the 10 separate chromosomes with NORs (Fig. 8.48). The DNA
from the remaining diploid chromosomes is distributed in specific
regions throughout the nucleoplasm (Fig. 8.47). During mitosis,
the chromosomes condense into a more compact form and the
nucleolus shrinks, then disappears altogether. A cell undergoing
mitosis thus has no nucleolus and synthesizes no rRNA. Once mitosis
is complete, the nucleolus reappears. As rRNA synthesis resumes,
ten tiny nucleoli appear, one near the end of each of 10 different
chromosomes; these enlarge, eventually fusing into the single large
nucleolus characteristic of the interphase human nucleus.
8.5.4.6 Nuclear Matrix and Transcript Domains
Like the cytoskeleton of the cell, the nucleus is thought to possess a
nuclear skeleton comprised of a network of insoluble protein fibers
known as the nuclear matrix.1134,3418-3423 This finely branched
meshwork of superfine filaments attaches to the nuclear lamina or
cortex (Section 8.5.4.3) and extends to the nucleolus. Assuming ~106
filaments each averaging ~50 nm long gives a total fiber length Lfiber
~ 50,000 microns, which for a D ~ 8 micron diameter nucleus implies
a mean grid spacing of:

L ~ D
L grid ~ 50 nm
3
fiber
1/2 




 {Eqn. 8.7}
Typical mesh spacings seen in electron micrographs do indeed range
from ~50-100 nm.1132 The filaments are constructed from a variety
of nuclear matrix proteins (NMPs). More than a dozen NMPs have
been identified, many of them cell-specific;3421,3422 also, NMPs
released by cancer cells differ from those released by normal cells of
the same type.3422,3423
The nuclear matrix organizes thousands of DNA replication sites
during mitosis, and provides architectural order during interphase
for RNA metabolism (wherein mRNA molecules are synthesized,
spliced, and made ready for export to the protein-synthesizing
machinery in the cytoplasm).1135The regions where RNA metabolism
occurs are called transcript domains.1133,1135,2021 A human nucleus
typically has 20-40 transcript domains, each ranging in diameter
from ~0.5 to 3 microns and aligned in a planar horizontal array in
the “lower” portion of the nucleus (Fig. 8.49); “lower” is toward the
ventral surface of a cell that is adherent to the glass plate used in the
microscopic study.1135 A single nucleolus occupies the “upper” or
“lower” portions of the nucleus with equal frequency; its position is
established by sequence-specific DNA binding proteins.1139 The
outermost edge of a transcript domain lies an average of ~0.8 microns
(range 0.5-1.2 microns) from the inside surface of the nuclear cortex or
nuclear envelope. Located in the core of each domain is a protein
called SC-35 that is required for the assembly of the molecular
machinery that splices the introns out of mRNA,3424 and each
domain is surrounded by a discrete border of high-density chromatin—with a given chromosome always occupying the same general
location in the nucleus at each mitotic phase. All 20-40 transcript
domains collectively occupy ~5% of the total nuclear volume,
whereas the specific RNA accumulations occupy no more than 1%.
However, nuclear matrix elements may not be necessary for
physical support inside each chromosomal territory. Several theoretic
descriptions of chromosome structure have been compared to
experimental data, and one such description, the Random-Walk/
Giant-Loop (RWGL) model,2466,3416 proposes that huge 3-5 million
base-pair (Mbp) loops are bound to a nuclear matrix that permeates
the region. More recently, polymer dynamics simulations of chromosomal territories performed by Munkel, Langowski and
Knoch1013,2464,2465,3417 suggest that a Multi-Loop-Subcompartment
(MLS) model is in better accord with experiment. In the MLS model,
chromatin fiber is folded into ~120 Kbp sized loops which are
organized into rosettes of 1-2 Mbp. The rosettes (which may be
structural units for replication, etc.) are interconnected by a piece
of chromatin of similar base pair content so that no protein matrix
is needed for structural support. The MLS model agrees with the
metaphase organization proposed by Pienta and Coffey.2467 The
MLS rosettes are clearly visible in Figure 8.50, which shows human
chromosome 15 in its highly condensed metaphase state, as it might
appear during mitosis. Figure 8.51 shows two polymer dynamics
simulations of the 3-5 micron3 territory of human chromosome 15
Fig. 8.50. MLS model of human chromosome 15 in its condensed
state during mitosis (courtesy of Tobias A. Knoch, Division of
Biophysics of Macromolecules, German Cancer Research Centre,
Heidelberg, Germany ©1999).2465 Fig. 8.51. Human chromosome 15 in its relaxed state between cell
divisions. At left, RWGL model of chromosome 15 territory; at
right, MLS model of chromosome 15 territory (courtesy of Tobias A.
Knoch, Division of Biophysics of Macromolecules, German Cancer
Research Centre, Heidelberg, Germany ©1999).2465
272 Nanomedicine • Volume I
in its relaxed state between cell divisions, using the RWGL model
(left) and the MLS model (right). The numerous apparently
matrix-free voids up to ~0.5 micron in diameter that appear in the
MLS simulation are presumably largely filled by another chromosome
(not shown). (Sometimes the two copies of chromosome 15 are
adjacent, but most of the time they are separated.) However,
numerous ~0.1 micron voids do exist (c.f. 100-nm keyhole passage;
Section 5.3.1.2), and dynamic processes may temporarily open still
larger spaces possibly large enough for a medical nanorobot to seek
slow, relatively safe and unobstructed passage, but the theoretical
pathways of spheres, diffusion and percolation through territories
remain to be studied [T. Knoch, personal communication, 1999].
8.5.4.7 Nucleonavigational Issues
Cytoplasmic medical nanorobots can perform many useful tasks
without entering the nucleus. Such tasks might include:
1. physical mapping and compositional analysis of the nuclear
envelope;
2. monitoring of nuclear pore traffic;
3. near-complete regulation of nuclear pore traffic using multiple
manipulators or other devices;
4. monitoring, initiating, or modifying cytoskeletally-mediated
mechanical signal transduction into the nuclear interior;
5. injection of enzymes, RNA or DNA fragments, or other bioactive
materials through nuclear pores using hollow nanoinjectors; or
6. partial or complete nucleoplasmic replacement using artificial
chromatin detachment enzymes dispensed by multiple injection
and extraction nanorobots positioned at the nuclear pores,
operated simultaneously and located antipodally around the
nucleus to establish flowthrough.
Entering the nucleus is somewhat more difficult than entering
the cytoplasmic space through the plasma membrane (Section
9.4.5.7). One reason is that the nucleus is almost completely surrounded
by the membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 8.45), and the
nearest of these membranes may lie only a few hundred nanometers
from the outermost surface of the nuclear envelope (Fig. 8.46). The
nuclear envelope is also a double-walled membrane. Another reason why nuclear entry is difficult is that physical forces applied to
cytoskeletal elements in the immediate vicinity of the nucleus may
trigger unwanted transcriptional, structural, or metabolic
responses from within the nucleus. Additionally, the 10-100 nm
grid size of the nuclear matrix filaments and the DNA rosette loops
may allow little free maneuvering room for nanorobots, which may
find it difficult to avoid tearing the nucleoskeleton during passage.
Given that the nucleus of a 20 micron human cell is only ~8
microns in diameter and thus encloses a volume of at most ~268
micron3 (Table 8.17), there is precious little maneuvering room for
a medical nanorobot that may be 1-30 micron3 in size. Once inside
the nucleus, a principle safety concern must be avoiding damage to
the relaxed euchromatin strands that permeate the nucleoplasmic
space. Only ~0.1 pN of force is required to move chromosomes
around the nucleus at ~0.1 microns/sec during mitosis.1463 DNA
base pair hydrogen bonds may be pulled apart with 70-75 pN/bond
of force,1066 although the DNA backbone itself can withstand up to
~10 nN in tension; most conservatively, nanorobots should never
apply tensile or shear forces greater than ~50 pN to chromatin strands
during nucleoplasmic locomotion. Care should also be taken to
design nanorobot exterior surfaces that are free of sharp edges and
which possess electrochemical characteristics that tend to be
nonattractive to DNA and to nucleosomal components. Since DNA
is negatively charged and histones are positively charged (to bind
the DNA), and since the lipid membranes are internally hydrophobic
but polar on the surface, the ideal nanorobot exterior might require
a surface of alternating charges which is nonhydrophobic and
neutral with regard to DNA, histones, and lipid surfaces.
How can a nanorobot determine its intranuclear position?
Chemonavigation is one crude approach. For example, a large number
of stable RNA species—mostly the small nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(snRNPs) essential for pre-messenger RNA splicing—are found in
the nucleoplasm, the cytoplasm, or both. They range in size from
90-300 nucleotides and are present in 105
-106 copies per cell (Table
8.19). snRNPs from HeLa (cancer line) cells contain ~40 proteins,
8 of which are shared by all snRNPs while the remaining ~32 proteins
are snRNP-type specific.1074 Nucleolus-specific proteins include
UBF (94-97 kD), Ki-67 (345-390 kD), fibrillarin (34 kD), numatrin
or B23 (38 kD), and nucleolin (100-110 kD);1141 different nucleolar
markers appear during mitosis. Detection of these species via
chemosensors allows a nanorobot to distinguish cytoplasmic, nucleoplasmic, and nucleolar spaces, and possibly may permit even finer
localizations. Various nucleic and protein products are continuously
being transcribed from various chromosomes, whose distinct territories within the nucleus are relatively fixed during interphase (Sections
8.5.4.4 and 8.5.4.6). Detection of specific proteins and intermediate
RNA transcription products in the nucleosol thus may allow chromosomal segment localization without having to actually sequence the
segment (e.g., in early-generation medical nanorobotic systems).
Nanorobots requiring a 100-nm three-dimensional Cartesian
navigation grid inside the nucleus may exploit the relatively uniform
acoustic characteristics of the extranucleolar nucleoplasm by tethering
a minimum of four small acoustic beacons tetrahedrally placed near
the inside surface of the nuclear cortex at the antipodes of three
transnuclear orthogonal coordinate axes. Each beacon emits brief
~1 GHz chirps in a distinguishable format unique to each beacon,
at a very low duty cycle to avoid excessive energy consumption.
From Eqn. 4.52, each chirp attenuates ~10-3 in amplitude per 100
nm of travel through the nucleoplasmic fluid. Hence an acoustic
detector sensitive to 10-6 atm pressure changes can establish
nanorobot position relative to each beacon to ~100 nm accuracy if
the beacon output amplitude during the brief chirp is ~10-3 atm.
Table 8.19. Some Species of Stable RNAs and Their
Localizations in Human Cells996
Number of
RNA Length (# of Molecules per Localization in Cell
Name Nucleotides) Cell or Nucleus
U3 216 3 x 105 Nucleolus
U6 106 3 x 105 Perichromatin granules
U1 165 1 x 106 Nucleoplasm
(heterogenous nuclear
RNA)
U2 188 5 x 105 Nucleoplasm
U4 139 1 x 105 Nucleoplasm
U5 118 2 x 105 Nucleoplasm
7-3 300 2 x 105 Nucleus
4.5S 91-95 3 x 105 Nucleus and cytoplasm
7S 280 5 x 105 Nucleus and cytoplasm
7-2 290 1 x 105 Nucleus and cytoplasm
Basic Capabilities • Navigation 273
This should be low enough to avoid any possibility of cavitation
damage to the chromatin or nuclear matrix. As a practical matter,
additional beacons may be needed to reduce measurement uncertainties caused by nucleoplasmic nonuniformities and post-placement
beacon positional shifts.
8.6 Ex Vivo Navigation
In this final Section of Chapter 8, we shall discuss ex vivo
navigation—the task of navigating the spaces external to the
human body. A comprehensive treatment is beyond the scope of
this introductory text, so the following discourse is necessarily brief.
From the nanomedical perspective, there are two distinct regimes
in which ex vivo navigation may be necessary or useful: the epidermal
regime and the exodermal regime.
8.6.1 Epidermal Navigation
Nanorobots traversing the epidermal regime (Section 9.5.2) must
ascertain their position on the surface of the skin or in the hair. The
epidermis averages ~100 microns thick but ranges up to 1000-1500
microns thick on the palms, soles, and other areas regularly subjected
to rubbing or pressure. There are no blood vessels in the epidermis,
so nanorobots may not be able to rely upon an internal
microtransponder network or related navigational facilities.
The simplest solution to epidermal navigation is basic
map-following. For example, the adult body has 2-4 million sweat
glands (100-200/cm2
, mean separation ~800 microns). Most of these
are saline- and urea-emitting eccrine glands ~20 microns in diameter,
prevalent on the back, chest, forehead, palms, and soles. A smaller
number of scent-secreting apocrine glands ~200 microns in diameter
are concentrated at the underarms, nipples, genitals, and anus.
Apocrine secretions are promptly broken down by skin bacteria to
make odoriferous androstenone (“stale urine”), androstenol
(“musky”), and isovaleric acid (“sweaty goatlike”).873 Sweat glands
are persistent dermal landmarks that are readily mapped, along with
their distinctive chemical secretions (including 0.028-0.4 mg/cm3
glucose).585 A positional or chemonavigational sweat gland map of
the ~2 m2 human skin surface to ~800 micron resolution requires
~3 million pixels or 24 megabits of data storage assuming 8-bit pixels.
An alternative or supplementary system is a follicular or crinal
map of 50-100 micron diameter hair shafts that are irregularly
distributed over the surface of the skin. Follicular map elements are
reasonably stable due to subdermal anchoring. Hair follicles normally
are most numerous on the scalp (~125,000 hairs or ~200/cm2
, with
a ~700 micron mean separation between shafts and a mean natural
life of 0.4-4 years), on the axillary (underarm), perineal and pubic
regions, on the eyebrows and eyelids of both genders (each eyebrow
has ~600 hairs with an average life of 112 days), and in a highly
variable number density on the face, chest, arms and legs, most
notably in males. An epidermal follicular map recording the locations
of ~200,000 individual hair shafts using (700 micron)2 8-bit pixels
requires 4 million pixels and 32 megabits of data storage. Crinal
navigation is readily accommodated as the nanorobot uses dead
reckoning to track its position while traversing individually
addressed hair shafts.
Epidermal map reliability is enhanced by noting numerous
landmarks that may be regarded as “permanent” features on the
timescale of nanorobotic actions. Such features might include scars,
birthmarks, tattoos, warts, corns, cysts, nevi, small skin flaps, or
dematofibromas. Stretch marks are found over the abdomen and
breasts during pregnancy, over the abdomen in cases of obesity or
fluid retention, on the necks of goiter patients, over the loins of
patients suffering from disorders affecting the sacroiliac region, and
over any distended organ. Epidermal maps are further enhanced
using dermatoglyphics,3425 the study of the patterns of ridges and
lines on the skin of the fingers, palms, wrists, toes, soles, and neck.
Many of these patterns are unique to a given individual (thus may
be used to verify patient identity, e.g., fingerprints) and are persistent
enough over time to serve as the basis for stable epidermal maps. Dermatoglyphics already plays a role in traditional diagnosis—Down’s
syndrome produces a characteristic mid-palm crease, and infant palm
prints can reveal telltale signs of congenital heart defect.3426-3428
Dermal ridges are also a sexually dimorphic trait—males have more
ridges than females, and both sexes usually have more ridges on the
right hand than on the left hand.1052 In 1998, mole (nevi) photographic surveillance was a preventative skin mapping procedure to
detect the onset of melanomas.
Less permanent but still useful epidermal landmarks include
wounds, blisters, sunburns, eczematous or psoriatic regions, or
chemical stains. Epidermal microbiotagraphic maps (Section 8.4.4)
are also possible, but microbial populations usually cluster near
apocrine glands and thus are unlikely to provide significant additional
navigational information.
Skin temperature varies greatly across the epidermis (Section
8.4.1). The nonuniform number density of sweat glands in the skin
produces highly localized periglandular temperature, moisture, and
chemical compositional variations. However, these variations probably
add little new information and are more difficult to interpret
because readings may be strongly influenced by numerous complicating factors such as clothing and cosmetics, general physical activity
level, localized physical activity (e.g., clapping hands), nonuniform
sunlight-mediated heating, airflow and winds, immersion of body
parts in water, and so forth. Nanorobots attempting to use this kind
of information will need a very sophisticated global knowledge of
somatic status.
Epidermal maps more accurate than ~1 mm might not prove
particularly useful because natural movement of highly elastic dermal
tissues may inject measurement errors of this magnitude into relative
positional data used to locate adjacent glands, follicles or other
epidermal landmarks.
8.6.2 Exodermal Navigation
Exodermal navigation encompasses an extremely broad range of
operating environments. Most nanomedically relevant are
nanorobots resident on or in droplets or boluses of sweat, saliva,
mucus, epidermal flakes, hairs, ejaculate, urine or feces that are
discharged from the body. Exodermal navigation also encompasses
all medically relevant environments such as:
1. clothing or bedding;
2. the surfaces and interiors of furniture (upon which fingerprints
typically stand ~5 microns tall), domiciles, vehicles, food,
cosmetics, and refuse; and
3. all possible locales including land (e.g., sidewalks, roads, public
buildings), water (e.g., drinking glasses containing beverage,
bathtubs, swimming pools, rivers), air (e.g., exhaled nanorobots
or airborne elements of nanorobotic personal defensive systems)
and even vacuum (e.g., spaceborne nanorobots). Each environment poses unique navigational challenges, a complete treatment
of which is quite beyond the scope of this book.
The airborne nanorobot (Section 9.5.3) is an interesting example
of these unique challenges. Airborne nanorobots can identify their
host patient by chemical signature, much like a bloodhound or
274 Nanomedicine • Volume I
mosquito following its quarry’s scent.3352 Such chemical signatures or
“odortypes” may include:
1. naturally-produced “baseline” chemical scents;
2. behaviorally-related scents which may appear or intensify during
specific events such as heavy exercise, fear reactions (e.g.,
emotional excitement alone can increase the sweat rate by
~50%), defecation or flatulence, sexual activity, intoxication,
and the like;
3. artificial scents such as perfumes, colognes, cosmetics and
deodorants; and
4. artificial molecular taggants specially designed to simplify the
recognition task, as for instance an odorless, volatile,
digitally-encoded messenger molecule emitted from an external
facility that is controlled by the patient.
Airborne nanorobots can stationkeep in the vicinity of the host
patient by acoustic homing on a coded ultrasonic beacon worn by
the patient, all of whose emanations are inaudible to the human
ear. From Eqn. 4.52 the amplitude of a ν = 100 KHz acoustic wave
passing through STP air over a range of x = 1 meter only attenuates
to ~25% of the original amplitude. Operational broadcast information
is readily passed from patient to circumcorporeal aerial nanorobots
using other similar acoustic channels (Section 7.4.8). Ex vivo
nanorobots can also detect normal conversational speech at a range
of ~2 meters using >2.4 micron3 pressure sensors (Section 4.9.1.6).
Airborne nanorobots can navigate and avoid no-fly zones (Section
9.5.3.6) by various methods. For instance, a flying nanorobot
approaching an infinite planar sheet of 308 K (35˚C) human flesh
would detect spatially anisotropic thermal emissions (peak wavelength
λmax = 9.35 microns, νmax = 32 THz; Eqn. 6.20) in a response time
of tmeas ~ 5 nanosec, assuming a photosensor area Ae = 1 micron2
,
SNR = 2 (~7 photons per detection), and dermal radiative intensity919
Id ~ 30 W/m2 (see Eqn. 4.59). (Mosquitos register a ~0.0006%
temperature differential at a 1-cm distance from human skin in real
time during flight; Section 4.6.1.)
As another example, all aerial nanorobots can continuously transmit relative skin-proximity data to their neighbors, allowing each
device within a virtual “warning lattice” to estimate its rate of
approach to the nearest prohibited surface. Consider a grid of 200
million nanorobotic acoustic buoys deposited on the ~2 m2 dermal
surface of a nude human body. The buoys are spaced 100 microns
apart, and each device has a 10-micron-diameter acoustic radiator
operating on a 16.7% duty cycle at 4.2 MHz, giving a ~10 microsec
signal repeat time using 7-wave signal packets (SNR = 2). An aerial
nanorobot with an acoustic receiver of equal size can detect a warning
buoy signal at a distance of 100 microns from the skin-resident grid,
assuming a continuous buoy broadcast power of ~35 pW/buoy
through air at 298 K (25˚C), giving a total grid emission power of
7 milliwatts. Note that a nanorobot flying at 10 m/sec travels 100
microns in 10 microsec. Monitoring Doppler shifts in received
frequency allows only the largest changes in relative velocity to be
measured over multiple packet cycles in a usefully short period of
time. At 4.2 MHz, summing ~50 packets (~500 microsec receipt
time) allows a relative velocity change of ~1 meter/sec to be
detected (Section 4.3.2).
Direct acoustic air ranging by individual flying nanorobots (i.e.,
echolocation) is also feasible but should be combined with a “warning
lattice” system to allow neighbors and prohibited surfaces to be
efficiently distinguished.
Power requirements may be estimated using Eqn. 7.22 by doubling
Xpath in the exponential, multiplying Pcomm by (Xpath/rantenna)
2 to
account for the doubled path length, and dividing Pcomm by the
coefficient of reflection at the air/skin interface (0.9995; Section
4.9.1.6). A 23.1% duty cycle at 3 MHz (again giving a ~10 microsec
repeat time at SNR = 2) allows aerial nanorobots to detect an
approaching skin surface from a distance of 100 microns, while consuming a continuous power draw of ~29,000 pW for a 10-micron
diameter receiver or ~230 pW for a 20-micron receiver, in air at 298 K.
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 9
Manipulation and Locomotion
9.1 Nanorobot Dexterity and Mobility
Manipulation and mobility are crucial basic capabilities in
most classes of medical nanodevices. Manipulation
includes handling fluids, biological objects such as tissue
matrix fibers or cellular elements, and nanomachines or their
components. Physicians must be able to direct tissue- or cell-repair
nanorobots to travel to a specific site where treatment is required,
and once there, to manipulate the local environment to achieve the
desired results. Nanodevice mobility in vivo makes possible the rapid
reconfiguration of nanomedical communication, navigation, and
power systems, while ex vivo mobility allows the design of more
robust diagnostic and personal defensive systems. In vivo locomotion
also permits precise mapping of the internal regions of the human
body across many size and time scales, both for diagnostic and for
therapeutic purposes.
This Chapter opens with a discussion of adhesion forces at the
molecular level and the performance of nanoscale fluid pumps and
fluidic circuits (Section 9.2). Several useful classes of
nanomanipulators are then presented, along with various tool tips
and manipulator configurations such as massively parallel manipulator
arrays (Section 9.3). Techniques of in vivo locomotion are next
described in the context of biofluid and nanodevice rheology,
including bloodstream swimming, cell walking and anchoring, tissue
diving, cell penetration, intracellular mobility, and cytocarriage
(Section 9.4). The Chapter concludes with a brief consideration of
ex vivo locomotion (Section 9.5).
Our evaluation of the biocompatibility3234 of various manipulation
and propulsion systems for medical nanodevices is deferred to Chapter
15.
Finally, the reader should be aware that as of 1999, much of the
available experimental data on cellular mechanics and forces in
biomolecular systems was still very incomplete and ill-defined. There
remained significant uncertainties in the reported numbers, many
of which were of necessity compiled from large-area or bulk measurements, or for just one type of easily-studied cell, cell membrane,
transmembrane protein, or receptor, and thus might prove inaccurate
when applied to other, seemingly similar, cellular systems. Thus
the calculations, estimates, and conclusions offered here are highly
tentative and must be applied with great caution.
9.2 Adhesion and Fluid Transport
An understanding of surface forces is an essential preliminary to
any study of mechanisms of manipulation or locomotion. Such
adhesive forces become important at the submicron scale where
nanorobotic parts are meshing with and sliding against one another.
Surface adhesion forces may cause tools, parts or workpieces to stick
together. Surface forces may cause airborne or solvent-immersed
nanodevices to adhere to container walls, to other dry or humid
surfaces, or to each other possibly causing clumping. For a 1-micron
object, the adhesive forces may exceed gravitational and inertial forces
by a factor of 106 or more. Capillary forces also are important in
fluid transfers inside nanodevices, in fluid transfers between
nanodevices or between nanodevices and their operating environment,
and during nanodevice tasks requiring locomotion through, or limb/
object manipulation in, a watery environment. Surface tension forces
are especially relevant during locomotion missions requiring passage
through air/water interfaces, as might occur in the lungs.
Bowling1146 classifies adhesive forces between objects into three
categories. The first category includes long-range attractive interactions
that may bring a particle to a surface and establish the adhesion
contact area, such as van der Waals forces (Section 9.2.1), electrostatic
forces (Section 9.2.2), and magnetic forces (Sections 4.7.2 and 5.4.1).
A second category of forces are the interfacial reactions that help to
define the adhesion area, most importantly the capillary forces arising
from the establishment of liquid or solid bridges between particle
and surface (Section 9.2.3), but also including other effects such as
sintering (diffusion and condensation), diffusive mixing, mutual
dissolution and surface alloying, which will not be considered further
here. In the third category are very short-range interactions that
may strengthen adhesion after an adhesive contact area has already
formed; such forces include chemical bonds of all types and various
noncovalent bonds such as hydrogen bonds that have already been
described in Section 3.5.1.
The rest of this Section is concerned with the transport and
manipulation of fluids. After a brief discussion of capillarity theory
and the unique problems associated with nanotubular fluid flow
(Section 9.2.4), this Section presents basic aspects of continuum
fluid flow (Section 9.2.5), describes the problems of effervescence
and crystallescence during offloading (Section 9.2.6), and concludes
by examining various design issues in submicron-scale fluid pumping,
plumbing, mixing, and containerization (Section 9.2.7).
9.2.1 Van der Waals Adhesion Forces
In dry or vacuum environments, adhesion forces between <100
micron diameter particles and surfaces (nanorobot and other)
separated by 100 nm or less are usually dominated by van der Waals
interactions.1149 Consider a spherical particle of radius r lying a small
distance zsep  100 nm from a flat plate of surface area A >> π r2
. As
a crude approximation, ignoring retardation effects that may
become important in solution for zsep > 5 nm,10 the van der Waals
adhesive force is approximated by:1146

F H r
6 z vdW
sep
2 = {Eqn. 9.1}
276 Nanomedicine • Volume I
for zsep << r, where H is the Hamaker constant for the interaction.
(Eqn. 9.1 also applies to two crossed cylinders of equal radius.1152)
The Hamaker constants for the materials comprising the sphere,
the plate, and the surrounding medium are Hs, Hp, and Hm,
respectively (Table 9.1), giving:1149

H ~ (H H ) (H H ) s
1/2
m
1/2
p
1/2
m
1/2 − − {Eqn. 9.2}
The adhesion separation distance zsep is often taken as ~0.4 nm for
particles in intimate (but chemically unbonded) contact with a
surface.1146,1148 Hence the force required to overcome the van der
Waals adhesive attraction of a perfectly rigid r = 0.5 micron particle
adhered to a diamond plate in vacuo (with zsep = 0.4 nm, H = 340
zJ) is FvdW ~ 180 nN.
Real particles are not perfectly rigid but deform under the influence
of this adhesive force. If the adhesion surface area is increased from
point contact to a circle of radius radhesion, then the van der Waals
adhesion force increases to:1146

F H r
6 z
H r
6 z vdW
sep
2
adhesion
sep
3 =





 +





 {Eqn. 9.3}
According to the JKR theory of adhesion mechanics1155 for a
sphere on a flat surface of the same material with a work of adhesion
Wadhesion (joined surface energy; Section 9.2.3) and elastic modulus
Ke:
1149

r ~ 6 r W
K adhesion
2
adhesion
e
1/3  π




 {Eqn. 9.4}
Assuming Wadhesion ~10 J/m2 and Ke ~ 1012 N/m2 for smooth
flawless diamond and r = 0.5 micron gives radhesion ~ 36 nm. Taking
zsep = 0.4 nm contact with a flat diamond plate over a ~4100 nm2
circular adhesion spot in vacuo, then FvdW ~ 1300 nN, a mean surface
pressure of pmean = FvdW / π radhesion2 ~ 3200 atm over the contact
circle and a peak pressure ppeak = 1.5 pmean = 4800 atm at the center.
As the sphere is pulled away, separation occurs abruptly when the
contact radius falls to radhesion / 41/3 = (~63%) radhesion = 23 nm.
Van der Waals forces also depend upon the roughness of the
surface. If a smooth sphere approaches a surface having uniform
rugosity or roughness brug with roughness feature size << r, then the
van der Waals force is approximately:1148

F z
z b
rug F sep
sep rug
= vdW
+









 1
2
{Eqn. 9.5}
For zsep = 0.4 nm and brug = 10 nm, Frug = 2% FvdW ~ 4 nN for
the rigid sphere (in vacuo) in the examples given above. Surface
dimpling is a common practice in MEMS fabrication, for example,
to reduce adhesion between polysilicon layers and the substrate.1382
A few other geometries of rigid bodies approaching contact are
useful as well. For example, the van der Waals adhesive force
between two flat plates of equal interfacial area A and uniform
separation zsep is:1152

F H A
24 z vdW
sep
3 = π
{Eqn. 9.6}
Two (1 nm)2 diamond plates separated by zsep = 0.4 nm in vacuo
require FvdW ~ 0.07 nN (~7 atm) to overcome the van der Waals
attractive force. Such plates are the same size as the contacting end
surfaces of the logic rods employed in Drexler’s mechanical computer
design (Section 10.2.1); the design assumes a rod realignment force
of 1 nN in the exemplar calculations.10 This result suggests that forces
on the order of 10-100 pN must be applied to mobile nanoscale
components inside mechanical nanodevices in order to overcome static
van der Waals adhesion that arises due to the contact proximity of parts
within the structure.
For another example, two rigid spheres of radii r1 and r2, separated
by a distance zsep << r1, r2, have a van der Waals adhesive force of:1152

F H r
6 z vdW
red
sep
2 = {Eqn. 9.7}
where the reduced radius rred = (r1 r2) / (r1 + r2). A pair of 1-micron
diameter rigid diamond spheres separated by zsep = 0.4 nm in vacuo
have a van der Waals mutual adhesive force FvdW ~ 90 nN.
As one final example, the van der Waals force between two parallel
cylinders of length L, radii r1 and r2, and separation zsep is (differentiating VvdW in Drexler10):

F
H L r
128 z vdW
sep
1/2
1/2
sep
5/2 = {Eqn. 9.8}
Table 9.1. Hamaker Constant for Various
Materials10,1146,1149,1152,1162
Hamaker
Material constant(zJ)
Vacuum or Air ~ 0
Cadherin-II coated surfaces3547 0.029
RBC plasma membrane1162 0.05-5
α-crystallin eye lens protein3548 0.26
Liquid helium 0.57
Methanol 36
Water 37
Polytetrafluoroethylene 38
Acetone 41
Ethanol 42
Hydrocarbons ~ 50
Hydrogen peroxide 54
Glycol 56
Fused silica (SiO2 quartz) 65
Polystyrene 66
Glycerol 67
KBr crystals 76
Polyethylene 76
Polyvinyl chloride 78
Platelet surfaces3545 ~100
Mica 135
Alumina (Al2O3, e.g., sapphire) 140
Germanium 252-290
Silicon 260-275
Graphite 275
Copper 325
Diamond 340
Silver 344
Metals (misc.) 300-500
Silicon carbide 440
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 277
A pair of 1-nm diameter, 10-nm long rigid diamondoid cylinders
lying exactly zsep = 0.4 nm apart along their entire length in vacuo
feel a van der Waals force of FvdW ~ 1.5 nN. In all three examples, as
before, the force rises slightly if the objects deform and declines
significantly if surface rugosity is increased. (See also
entropic packing, Section 9.4.2.3.)
9.2.2 Electrostatic Adhesion Forces
Two types of electrostatic forces may act to hold particles to
surfaces. The first type of force is due to bulk excess charges present
on the particle or surface which produce a classical Coulombic
attraction known as the electrostatic image force. Consider two
spheres of radii r1 and r2 located a distance zsep apart, where zsep <<
r1, r2. Then following Eqn. 4.40 the image force is given by:1148

F q q
4 d
4 r
image 1 2
0 e sep
2
1 2 red
2
0 e
= = π ε κ
π σ σ
ε κ
{Eqn. 9.9}
where q1 and q2 are charge on the two spheres (coul), σ1 and σ2 are
the surface charge densities (coul/m2
), ε0 = 8.85 x 10-12 farad/m
(permittivity constant), κe is the dielectric constant of the medium,
and dsep ~ r1 + r2 is the distance between charge centers. Taking
σ1 ~ σ2 = 10-5 coul/m2 (~63 charges/micron2
; cf. ~1000 charges/
micron2 for “highly charged surfaces”1151), r1 ~ r2 = 0.5 micron and
κe = 1 in vacuo, then Fimage ~ 0.009 nN.
The electrostatic image force between two flat plates of equal
interfacial area A, equal charge density σ, and uniform separation
zsep with zsep << A1/2, is:727
F A
2 image
2
0 e
= σ
ε κ
{Eqn. 9.10}
For σ ~ 10-5 coul/m2 and A = 1 micron2 in vacuo (κe = 1), Fimage
~ 0.006 nN (~0.00006 atm). At larger zsep and a voltage differential
Vplate between the plates with capacitance Cplate, then:

F
C V
2 z
 A V
2 z image
plate plate
2
sep
0 e plate
2
sep
2 = = ε κ {Eqn. 9.11}
Thus if A = 1 micron2
, Vplate = 1 volt, and zsep = 0.2 micron, then
Fimage ~ 0.1 nN.
The second and more important type of electrostatic force for
very small particles is the electrostatic contact potentials, also known
as induced electrical double layer forces.1146 When two different
initially uncharged materials with different local energy states and
work functions are brought into contact, charge flows between them
until an equilibrium is reached. The resulting potential difference is
called a contact potential, Vcontact, which typically ranges from ~0-1
volt. In the case of two metals, only the surface layer which is xcontact
~ 1 nm thick (the gap for tunneling) carries contact charges; for
semiconductors and insulators, these regions may
extend into the bulk up to xcontact ~ 1 micron or deeper.1146 For a
spherical particle of radius r at a distance zsep from a surface, the
induced charge density1147 is σ = ε0 Vcontact / zsep and the contact
force is:1146

F r V
z contact 0 contact
2
sep
= π ε {Eqn. 9.12}
Taking r = 0.5 microns, Vcontact = 0.5 volts, and zsep = 5 nm, then
Fcontact ~ 1 nN (~0.01 atm). Induced charge densities vary
experimentally from 2 x 10-7 coul/m2 (~2 x 10-11 atm contact pressure)
for polystyrene on polystyrene1153 up to 2 x 10-2 coul/m2 (~200
atm) for SiO2 on mica.1154 In this latter study, a pair of
contact-adhered silica/silica sheets required a force of ~0.08 nN/nm to
pull them apart and a mica/mica pair required ~ 0.11 nN/nm;
however, due to contact electrification a silica/mica pair
required 6.6-8.8 nN/nm to separate.1154 Proper nanomechanical
design can avoid or enhance these effects, as required.10
Double layer electrostatic contact forces usually predominate over
electrostatic image forces for small particles; image forces are
important only for materials that can carry high surface charges,
such as polymers of poor conductivity or other extreme insulators.
Because of their r/zsep dependency, contact electrical forces are usually
more important than van der Waals forces only for large particles
and at separations wider than ~100 nm, although electrical forces
can dominate in smaller particles if the surface asperities of the particles
are significant enough to remove the bulk of the particle from the
contact point, thus greatly reducing the van der Waals interaction.1146
In either case, the total forces of adhesion far outweigh the force of
gravity, given by:

F 4
3 g gravity
3 = π r ρ {Eqn. 9.13}
For density ρ = 3510 kg/m3 for diamond, acceleration of gravity
g = 9.81 m/sec2
, and particle radius r = 0.5 micron, Fgravity ~ 10-5
nN; for r = 1 nm, Fgravity = 10-13 nN.
Entropic and electrostatic effects can sometimes interact to produce
an apparent repulsion between opposite charges—as, for example,
between positively charged bilayer surface and negatively charged
colloidal particles.3674
9.2.3 Immersive Adhesion Forces
For hydrophilic particles exposed to high humidity, or immersed
and then withdrawn from a fluid, a liquid film can form on the
surface of the particle by capillary condensation or by capillary
action between particle and surface. For a spherical particle of
radius r linked by a liquid bridge to a planar surface of the same
material with contact area A, separation zsep, and liquid surface tension
γ, then the capillary force between sphere and plane is Fcapillary ~ 2 γ
A / zsep for small contact angles between the liquid and the surfaces.1147
Assuming hydrophilic (wettable) surfaces with wetting coefficient
cos(θ) as defined in Section 9.2.4 and zsep << r, the capillary force is
given approximately by:1146,1147,1149

F 4 r cos( ) capillary = π γ θ {Eqn. 9.14}
which has been confirmed experimentally by direct measurement.1149
For the water-air interface, cos(θ) ~ 1 and surface tension γ = 75.6 x
10-3 N/m at the freezing point (273 K), 72.75 x 10-3 N/m at room
temperature (293 K), 70.05 x 10-3 N/m at human body temperature
(~310 K), 58.90 x 10-3 N/m at the boiling point at 1 atm (373 K), and
110 x 10-3 N/m for ice at 273 K.763,1149Thus at room temperature, the
capillary force on an r = 0.5 micron particle is Fcapillary ~ 460 nN; an
r = 10 nm particle feels Fcapillary ~ 9 nN, a rather substantial force.
Liquid bridges containing dissolved substances may evaporate and create
solid crystalline bridges. Hydrophobic surfaces are generally unaffected
by capillary forces.1146
Eqn. 9.14 also applies to nanorobots that are caught in an
air-liquid interface such as the surface of a puddle of water, alveolar
fluids in the lung, or an epidermal pool of sweat. However, adding
capillary-active solute to a solvent may lower surface tension
278 Nanomedicine • Volume I
considerably. For dilute surface concentrations of a solute of molecular
area Amol in solvent of surface tension γ0 at temperature T, the
resulting surface tension of the solution drops to:390

γ γ = 0 −
mol
kT
A (N/m) {Eqn. 9.15}
For palmitic or stearic acid (e.g., soap), Amol ~ 0.21 nm2
;
2178
added to water (γ0 = 70.05 x 10-3 N/m) at 310 K, surface tension
falls to γ = 49.70 x 10-3 N/m. More concentrated solutions further
reduce surface tension, nonlinearly with concentration. For example,
γ ~ 25 x 10-3 N/m for a 0.1 M aqueous fatty-acid solution of hexanoic acid (CH3(CH2)4COOH; MW = 116 daltons), a total of ~6
x 107 molecules, ~0.01 micron3
, or ~0.01 picograms of hexanoic
acid per micron3 of solution.390 For the aqueous solution-air interface,
inorganic electrolytes (e.g., NaCl), organic acid salts, low-MW bases,
and certain nonvolatile nonelectrolytes such as glucose and glycerin
are capillary inactive.390
Surface tension is reduced even more dramatically by biological
surfactants. Lung surfactant, whose activity is largely attributed to
the phospholipid palmitoylphosphatidylcholine,996 produces a nonlinear change in surface tension with area. As the lungs fill with air,
more-inflated alveoli have higher γ’s than less-inflated alveoli, serving
to stabilize alveoli of different sizes.526 Aqueous solutions of surfactant
from mammalian lung extracts show a surface tension reduction to
as low as γ ~ 0.7 x 10-3 N/m at 20% of maximum film distension.2179
Survanta, an intratracheal pulmonary surfactant commonly used in
the treatment of respiratory distress syndrome (aka. hyaline membrane
disease) in premature infants, lowers minimum aqueous surface
tension to γ  8 x 10-3 N/m.2119
Adhesion forces are greatly reduced for particles and surfaces
that remain completely immersed in liquid. Surface tension effects
are largely eliminated.1146,1147 Electrostatic image forces (Eqns. 9.9
and 9.10), already quite small, are further reduced by a factor of
κe
-1 ~ 1-2% (κe = 74.3 for pure water at 310 K, usually reduced to
~40 in a hydrophobic environment). Electrostatic contact forces
may be greatly reduced because of sorption phenomena which tend
to shield the charges (Sections 3.5.1 and 4.7.1). For particles and
plates made of the same material, charges generally form the same
double layers on both surfaces so that the double layer interactions
are repulsive, thus reducing the net adhesive force, by an amount:1146

F ~ 64 kT r c x shield ion contact π {Eqn. 9.16}
where k = 0.01381 zJ/K (Boltzmann constant), T is temperature, r
is particle radius, cion is the volumetric charge density of ions in the
liquid, and xcontact is the double layer thickness. Taking T = 310 K,
r = 0.5 micron, cion ~1026 ions/m3 (~1% or 0.15M NaCl aqueous
solution, ~human blood), and xcontact ~ 0.8 nm (~Kdh-1; Section
3.5.1), then Fshield ~ 34 nN. (Effective double layer thickness xcontact
~ 1 nm for a 0.1M solution of univalent electrolyte, ~10 nm for a
0.001M solution.1162) While different ions may collect in various
alignments at unlike surfaces so that attractive (i.e.,contributing to
adhesion) or repulsive shielding forces are possible, in most cases
involving nanodevice surfaces that are fully immersed in human
body fluids the electrostatic contact forces should be quite small.
The van der Waals force is also moderately reduced in fluids. For
example, van der Waals adhesion between two diamondoid
nanodevice surfaces fully immersed in water is only half of its vacuum
value because the Hamaker constant (Eqn. 9.2) is reduced from
340 zJ to 153 zJ. Blood cells are subject to similar forces. It has been
proposed that the ~15 nm gap frequently observed between the
surfaces of aggregated red cells represents the position of the potential
energy minimum where the forces of electrostatic repulsion (between
negatively charged red cells) and the van der Waals attractive forces
are equal.1162 Taking H = 5 zJ, rred = 3 microns and zsep = 15 nm in
Eqn. 9.7, the net attractive force between red cells is FvdW ~ 0.01
nN.
Surface force experiments have demonstrated molecular control
of adhesion at a fine level.1152 According to the commonly-used
JKR theory,1155 the mechanical force needed to separate two elastic
spheres each of radius r already adhered by molecular contact is:

F 3
4
W r adhesion adhesion = 

 


π {Eqn. 9.17}
where Wadhesion is the Dupre reversible work of adhesion (energy
per unit area). For example, hydrocarbon rubber spheres display
Wadhesion = 71 x 10-3 J/m2 in air but only 6.8 x 10-3 J/m2 in water.
When sodium dodecyl sulfate1155 or dodecylammonium chloride3546
is added to the water so the liquid can wet the surface, Wadhesion
actually becomes negative—the surfaces are pushed apart by the
intervening fluid. Nonwetting liquids increase adhesion. For
instance, polydimethyl siloxane rubber has Wadhesion = 43.6 x 10-3 J/m2
to itself, in air. In water, a nonwetting liquid, adhesion nearly doubles
to 74 x 10-3 J/m2
; in methanol, a wetting liquid, adhesion is almost
eliminated, falling to 6 x 10-3 J/m2
.
1160 In nanomedical engineering
applications where minimization of adhesive forces is an important
design objective, adhesion of specific classes of materials may be
virtually eliminated by surface modifications that reduce Wadhesion,
as is commonplace in biological surfaces and in engineered capillary
coatings designed to reduce electroosmotic drag force during capillary
zone electrophoresis.1229
9.2.4 Capillarity and Nanoscale Fluid Flow
In vivo nanodevices will often find it necessary to inject or to
extract small aliquots of fluid from organelles, cells, tissues, or the
environment. Internal gas or liquid transfers will also be commonplace
in fluidic tethers, hydraulic communication and power conduits,
nanohydraulic pistons, manipulators and metamorphic bumper
drivers, and in bulk transfers into sensor cavities or chemical reaction
chambers inside nanofactories (Chapter 19). Nanopipes may also
be used in biomimetic nanosystems such as artificial organs and
artificial cell components such as tubulin substitutes (Chapter 21).
Hence it is essential to examine the nature of fluid flows and
“wicking” in nanocapillary vessels, and the likely behavior of fluids
in nanomachines.
The theory of macroscale capillarity is well-studied.1163 The
concept of “wetting” is basic. Consider a fluid in a vessel. At the
solid-liquid-gas interface (the vessel wall) there is a characteristic
contact angle θ, the angle at which the meniscus contacts the container
wall. This angle is indicative of the balance between the forces of
(1) adhesion between the liquid and the solid wall and (2) cohesion
within the surface of the liquid. A contact angle <90˚ means that
adhesion is strong and the liquid is “wetting” the tube; an angle
>90˚ implies that adhesion is relatively weak and the liquid is
“nonwetting.” In air against glass, the liquids alcohol, glycerol, and
pure water have θ ~ 0˚, while turpentine has θ ~ 17˚ and impure
water has θ ~25˚;1164 all are wetting. On the other hand, mercury
on glass has θ = 140˚ and water on paraffin has θ = 109˚;1164 both
are nonwetting.
In the classical example of capillarity, one end of a narrow-bore
open-ended tube is dipped vertically into a liquid. The liquid wets
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 279
the tube, and the liquid rises until the force due to surface tension
(Fcap) pulling the liquid upward equals the force of gravity (Fgrav)
pulling the column of liquid downward at some height hcap, given
by:1163

h 2 cos( )
g r ( ) cap
lg
cap l g
= −
γ θ
ρ ρ
{Eqn. 9.18}
with wetting coefficient cos(θ) = (γsg - γsl) / γlg (the Young equation1163)
where γ is surface tension at the solid-gas (sg), solid-liquid (sl),
or liquid-gas (lg) interfaces; ρl and ρg are liquid and gas density;
g = 9.81 m/sec (acceleration of gravity) and rcap is the inside diameter of
the tube. Thus pure water with air at STP in a glass capillary with
rcap = 1 micron can rise hcap = 15 meters against gravity, representing a
mean pressure pcap = hcap g (ρl - ρg) = 1.5 atm. A nonwetting liquid
does not rise up the tube, but falls instead.
In the more general case of a linear capillary tube whose flow
vector makes an angle ϕgrav with the ambient gravity field (e.g.,
ϕgrav = π is a tube pointing straight up), then the force on the fluid
column is:

F FF column cap grav = + {Eqn. 9.19}

F 2 cos( ) r cap lg cap = π γ θ {Eqn. 9.20}

F h ( ) g cos( )r grav cap l g grav cap
2 = π ρρ ϕ − {Eqn. 9.21}
Taking the largest reasonable tube that might fit inside an in
vivo nanorobot, hcap = 1 micron, rcap = 0.1 micron, ρl - ρg ~ 1000
kg/m3
, γlg ~ 72 x 10-3 N/m for pure water, and taking cos(θ)
~ cos(ϕgrav) ~ 1, then Fcap/Fgrav ~ 108
, giving the familiar result that
gravity can usually be ignored in nanoscale systems. For this
example, Fcolumn ~ Fcap = 44 nN and column fluid pressure pcolumn ~
2 γlg cos(θ) / r = 14 atm. Taking instead the smallest reasonable
nanocapillary tube with hcap = 20 nm and r = 2 nm, then Fcap/Fgrav
~ 1011, Fcolumn ~ 0.9 nN and pcolumn ~ 700 atm, making a quite
substantial wicking force. Of course, the frictional effect of the
interface region requires that a finite pressure P0 ~ 2 α / rcap must be
applied before fluid motion will begin,1188 where α = 0.01-0.1 N/m
(experimental); taking α ~ 0.01 N/m, then P0 ~ 2 atm for r = 0.1
micron, or ~100 atm for r = 2 nm.
The capillary force may also be compared to the simple hydrostatic
suction force:

F r p suck cap
2 = π ∆ {Eqn. 9.22}
A nanopipette with inside radius rcap = 0.1 micron which is
pressed against a plasma membrane surface and is then evacuated
behind the attachment point sufficiently to create a surfacial pressure
differential of ∆p = 0.3 atm produces a purely hydrostatic suction
force of Fsuck = 1 nN.
Such classical continuum models assume, among other things,
that the molecular graininess of the fluid can be ignored. This
assumption fails when tube dimensions (e.g., rcap) are comparable
to the characteristic molecular length scale (λ) of the fluid.10 In a
gas, λgas is the mean free path between collisions. For Tgas = 310 K
air with ngas = 2.4 x 1025 molecules/m3 at pgas = ngas kTgas = 1 atm
pressure, the free path is given by:

λgas π π 1/2
gas gas
2 1 1/2
gas gas
2
gas
1 (2 n d ) (2 p d / kT )
 ~ 200 nm
= = − −
{Eqn. 9.23}
under ideal gas conditions, if we take the effective molecular diameter
as dgas ~ 0.2 nm. At high pressure, van der Waals equation must be
used (Section 10.3.2), but for pgas = 1000 atm with ngas = 1.3 x 1028
molecules/m3
, then λgas ~ 0.4 nm. In a liquid, λliq ~ dliq, the
molecular diameter; for water molecules, λliq ~ 0.3 nm.
A ratio of rcap/λ ~ 1 marks an important transition because it
implies that molecules are colliding with the walls about as often as
they are colliding with each other. If rcap << λ, then intermolecular
interaction is rare, wall collisions are relatively frequent, and
molecular motion is largely ballistic between wall impacts. But if
rcap >> λ, then molecule/wall interactions are relatively rare and
intermolecular collisions are relatively frequent. In the latter situation
the continuum flow relations should become valid, for example when
rcap >> 200 nm for gases at ~1 atm or when rcap >> 0.4 nm for gases
at ~1000 atm, or when rcap >> 0.3 nm for liquids.
The range of non-continuum skin layer effects appears quite
narrow in many cases. For instance, two smooth mica surfaces that
are slowly brought together while immersed in various nonaqueous
fluids display oscillating attractive and repulsive forces as a function
of separation when the gap is less than 6-10 molecular diameters;
periodic jump distances are about equal to the molecular diameter
of the fluid.1165 Oscillations become smaller between rough surfaces
and in liquids that mix molecules of different sizes.1149 Similar
experiments in water with electrolyte produce similar behavior, but
with ionic double layer repulsions superimposed—oscillatory solvent
forces become significant only at zsep < 2 nm.1166 Elastohydrodynamic
simulations suggest that flat gold surfaces separated by 2.3 nm with
0.9-nm asperities (the “near-overlap” case) should slide smoothly
on a thin film of liquid lubricant molecules, albeit with
nanometer-scale cavitated zones extending ~3 nm downstream
persisting for ~0.1 nanosec at a sliding velocity of 10 m/sec.1172
Solvation forces may also appear at separations below a few molecular
diameters.1149
These results suggest that water-carrying nanocapillaries >2-4nm
in internal diameter should function largely in line with continuum
models. Early theoretical calculations predicted that open-ended
carbon nanotubes as small as 0.8 nm in diameter might act as
“nanostraws” and could wick in molecules from vapor or fluid
phases.1167 Subsequent experiments1168-1170 confirmed that fluids
with γlg  190 x 10-3 N/m, including liquid sulfur, liquid selenium
and nitric acid, are readily drawn into the inner cavity of carbon
nanotubes with inside diameters of 4-8 nm through capillarity.1169
This limit is sufficiently high to allow nanotube wetting by water
(γlg ~ 72 x 10-3 N/m), most organic solvents (γlg < 72 x 10-3 N/m),
and liquid acids (e.g., γlg ~ 43 x 10-3 N/m for HNO3) which can
then be used as low surface tension carriers to introduce dissolved
solute into the nanotubes.1170 Bulk nanotubes are readily wetted by
water.1168 Good wetting is favored when the polarizability of the
tube material is higher than that of the liquid.1171 Pure metals like
molten lead or mercury with γlg  190 x 10-3 N/m do not wet
carbon nanotubes and are not drawn in by capillarity. Such high-γlg
liquids may be forced into the nanotubes by applying a hydrostatic
pressure pforce given by the Laplace equation:1168
280 Nanomedicine • Volume I

p ~
2 cos( )
r force
lg
cap
γ θ {Eqn. 9.24}
Thus, liquid mercury with γlg = 490 x 10-3 N/m can be pushed
into an rcap = 0.5 micron tube by applying pforce ~ 20 atm to the
fluid; pforce ~ 2000 atm for rcap = 5 nm.
By 1998, detailed molecular dynamics simulation of fluid flow
inside 1.3-1.6 nm diameter carbon nanotubes had been a subject of
active research.1173,1174 One major difference between macroscale
and nanoscale fluidic systems is that in nanomachines the tube walls
may be considerably less rigid* and may flex and resonate.
Nanomachine designers must take into account the effects of these
vibrations as they are transmitted through nanoscale structural elements
attached to the tubes. Furthermore, tube wall motions are sometimes
strongly size-dependent. The simulations confirmed that fluids flow
faster through rigid tubes than through floppy tubes, as predicted
by classical hydrodynamics theory (Section 9.2.5). At high flow
velocities we may expect nanotubes to exhibit buckling modes,
variable patency, progressive wave propagation, sluicing,
flow-limiting flutter, and stall, by analogy to the fluid mechanics of
compliant tube flow in human veins.361 Carbon nanotubes may be
rigidified by imposing a stretching tension, or possibly may be
replaced by stiffer diamondoid tubes.1173 If the fluid has more than
one kind of atom, size-mass effects and differing interaction ranges
or strengths may cause one or more species to segregate at the walls
or to flow at different rates.1174
Material flow through nanotubes has been well-exploited by
biology, including the bacterial sex pili3549 (Section 5.4.2), bacterial
anal pores and cytoprocts,3550 cellular excretory canals (e.g., in
the glandular cells of the pancreas), 10-100 nm intranuclear nucleolar
canals (Section 8.5.4.5), the 20-40 nm wide hollow tubular fluid
transport network that forms the smooth intracellular endoplasmic
reticulum (Section 8.5.3.5), the 75-nm diameter nutrient-transporting
tubovesicular membrane network of the human malaria parasite,1183
the >100-nm wide fluid-carrying human bone canaliculi (Section
8.2.4), and prelymphatic tissue channels (Section 8.2.1.3).
The syringelike T4 bacteriophage tail assembly is perhaps the
best-studied example of biological nanotube flow.1179,1180 The
100-nm long, 20-nm wide cylindrical T4 tail assembly, made of 15
different proteins joined in 24 annular segments with an 8-nm
inside bore, has a set of small fibers near the tip that attach to the
plasma membrane of the host cell. After a lysozyme-like enzyme
opens a breach in the host cell wall, the tail sheath thickens and
contracts,1181 inserting a ~2.8 megadalton hollow core protein
nanotube (80 nm long, 7 nm wide, 2.5 nm inside bore) through
the host cell integument. The protein nanotube is then uncorked in
response to chemical signals, and a large-molecule (mostly putrescine
and spermadine) pressure of ~30 atm ejects a single 70-micron long,
2-nm wide DNA thread (~50% of head volume) through the 2.5-nm
nanotube aperture and out into the cell typically in ~3 seconds, a
mean flow velocity of ~23 microns/sec.1178 (DNA packing into the
capsids of some phages is purely mechanical.1723) The
double-stranded DNA thread rotates ~4000 times around its axis as
it emerges.1182 Under optimum conditions, initial injection velocity
may start as high as 360 micron/sec with a minimum injection time
of 0.23 sec.1178
The tensile strength of liquids may also be important in
nanorobot internal fluid flows, even in the complete absence of
capillarity. For instance, completely liquid-filled wetted tubes with
no gas pockets make a continuous liquid column that can exhibit a
large internal tensile strength Kliquid ~ 4 γlg / xmolec,
1163 where xmolec
~ 10 nm is the approximate maximum range of intermolecular forces.
Taking γlg ~ 72 x 10-3 N/m for water, Kliquid ~ 300 atm. There is
experimental evidence that water saturated with air but denucleated by
high pressures does exhibit a tensile strength on the order of ~300
atm.1175 This tensile strength, and not capillarity, is credited for the
ability of tall trees to pull sap up to 115 meters high,1176 far exceeding
the maximum 10.33 meters that water can be pulled vertically at
the Earth’s surface using a vacuum pump. M. Zimmermann2031
reviews the sap transport system; the maximum pull recorded
experimentally in trees is 120 atm.2032
9.2.5 Pipe Flow
Cellular and nuclear microinjection using fine glass pipette tips
as small as 200 nm in diameter is commonplace in the experimental
biological sciences.1191 In small tubes or nanoinjectors with rcap >>
λ (Section 9.2.4), nanoscale fluid flow behavior is approximated
reasonably well by the classical continuum equations. Continuum
flow1390 is governed by the famous Hagen-Poiseuille Law (or more
commonly, Poiseuille’s Law), derived from the Navier-Stokes equations,
which states that a pressure difference of ∆p between the ends of a
tube of radius rtube and length ltube will move an incompressible
fluid of absolute viscosity η in laminar flow at a volume rate of:

VHP tube
4
tube
tube
2
flow
3 r p
8 l = = r v (m /sec) π ∆
η
π {Eqn. 9.25}
The subsonic mean fluid velocity (vflow), flow power dissipation
(Pflow), and the flow time of an aliquot of fluid through the length
of the entire tube (tflow) then follow directly from Eqn. 9.25 as:

v r p
8 l (m/sec) flow
tube
2
tube
= ∆
η
{Eqn. 9.26}

P r p
8 l (watts) flow
tube
4 2
tube
= π ∆
η
{Eqn. 9.27}

t
8 l
r p
 (sec) flow
tube
2
tube
2 = η
∆
{Eqn. 9.28}
Taking η= 0.6915 x 10-3 kg/m-sec for pure water at T = 310 K, a
nanotube with rtube = 10 nm, ltube = 1 micron, and ∆p = 1 atm
passes fluid at VHP = 0.6 micron3
/sec, vflow = 2 mm/sec, with tflow = 0.5
millisec. The incompressibility assumption generally holds in liquids
and in gas flows where ∆p << ptube, where ptube is the head pressure at
the tube entrance.
The above equations describe the resistance to Poiseuille (laminar)
flow in a pipe, which is the minimum of resistance of all possible
flows in a pipe.361 If the flow becomes turbulent, the resistance
increases. The determinative parameter is a dimensionless quantity
called the Reynolds number,1187 NR, which is the ratio of the inertial
pressure (~ ρ vflow2
) to the viscous pressure (~ η vflow / rtube) in the
flow of a fluid of density ρ, or:

N v r R flow tube = ρ
η
{Eqn. 9.29}
For the example of the 10-nm nanotube in the previous paragraph,
NR ~ 10-5. A large Reynolds number (Section 9.4.2.1) implies a
* Approximately 100 nN of force are required to produce the first buckling2659 of a carbon nanotube pressed perpendicularly onto a diamond surface. Nanotube compressive
strength is ~1.5 x 1011 N/m2
 ~ 1.5 million atm, easily sufficient to penetrate any biological surface.
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 281
preponderant inertial effect and the onset of turbulence; a small
Reynolds number implies a predominant shear effect (e.g., viscosity)
and the maintenance of laminar flow. Reynolds1187 found that the
transition from laminar to turbulent flow typically occurred at NR
~ 2000-13,000, depending upon the smoothness of the entry
conditions. The lowest value obtainable experimentally on a rough
entrance appeared to be NR ~ 2000. However, when extreme care
was taken to establish smooth entry conditions (as is more likely in
precisely structured nanotubes constructed using molecular manufacturing techniques) the transition could be delayed to Reynolds
numbers as high as 40,000.
Even assuming the more conservative NR ~ 2000 figure, it is
clear that subsonic flow in nanoscale pipes will almost always be
laminar. For a pipe with rtube = 1 micron conveying water at 310 K
(ρ = 993.4 kg/m3
), the onset of turbulent flow (taking NR ~ 2000)
occurs at vturb (= vflow in Eqn. 9.29) > 1400 m/sec, very nearly the
speed of sound in water. In gases or liquids of lower density, or in
pipes of narrower bore, or if a less conservative transitional Reynolds
number is available due to superior design, then vturb grows still larger.
Thus turbulence is primarily a high-velocity, large-tube phenomenon.
In such turbulent flow situations with NR  1000, a well-known
empirical formula for the volume flow rate is:363

Vturb HP
3 ~ V / Z (m /sec) {Eqn. 9.30}
where the turbulence factor Z = 0.005 NR
3/4. Thus for NR = 3000,
Vturb ~ 0.5 VHP. Nevertheless, even in turbulent conditions of the
general flow, fluid motion nearest the tube wall remains laminar in
a thin layer of thickness xlam, often estimated as:1186

x ~ 50 l
r p lam
tube
tube
1/2
η ρ ∆


 

 {Eqn. 9.31}
For flowing water at 310 K and rtube = 10 micron, ltube = 100
micron, and ∆p = 10 atm giving vflow ~ 200 m/sec and NR ~ 3000,
then xlam ~ 0.5 microns.
Poiseuille’s Law assumes a rigid pipe, an assumption that may
not hold for some nanotube designs and which certainly does not
hold for human blood vessels, especially the veins. A complete treatment of fluid flow in elastic tubes is beyond the scope of this book.
However, for steady laminar flow in an elastic tube with wall thickness
hwall, radius rtube, length ltube, p0 and p1 the pressures at the entry
and exit ends of the tube, and Ewall = Young’s modulus of a Hookean
(e.g., a linear force-distance relationship) wall material, then the
volume flow rate through the tube may be approximated by:361

Velastic
h tube
4
tube
1
h
3
0
h
3 c r 3
24 l 1 p
c 1 p
c = (m /sec) 




 − 

 

 − − 

 










− − π
η
{Eqn. 9.32}
where ch = E hwall / rtube. Taking η = 0.6915 x 10-3 kg/m-sec for
water at 310 K , hwall = 2 nm, rtube = 10 nm, ltube = 1 micron, p1 = (0.5
p0) = 1 atm, and E = 107 N/m2 (typical for human skin; Table 9.3),
then Velastic = 0.3 micron3
/sec. Care must be taken in applying this
formula because many biological tube materials such as blood vessel
walls are non-Hookean and exhibit a linear pressure-radius relationship instead. For small elastic deformations, the volume flow rate of
such non-Hookean tubes may be approximated by:361

Vbv
tube
4
tube
 r
20 l = π
α η
{Eqn. 9.33}
where α is the compliance constant, measured experimentally in
feline pulmonary veins as 1.98-2.79 m2
/N for rtube = 50-100
microns down to 0.57-0.79 m2
/N for rtube = 400-600 microns.1190
Other geometric nonuniformities such as regular and irregular tube
tapers, embedded resonance chambers, tube bifurcations or
multitube confluences have important effects on flow rate but are
beyond the scope of this book. Poiseuille’s Law also does not strictly
hold for fluids seeded with polymers in concentrations as low as
10-4-10-5 by weight, wherein drag may be reduced by a factor of
2-3.2952,2953
It bears repeating here that as pipes get very small, they can clog
more easily due to van der Waals adhesive forces,1152 so it becomes
increasingly important to engineer interior vessel surfaces for minimum
adhesivity with respect to all materials likely to be transported
through the pipes (Section 9.2.3). Bursting strength of fluid-filled
pressure vessels is addressed in Section 10.3.1.
9.2.6 Effervescence and Crystallescence
Diffusion-limited molecular inflow rates to nanodevices have
already been discussed in connection with molecular transport
(Section 3.2.2), chemical sensors (Section 4.2), chemical power
sources (Sections 6.3.4.1 and 6.5.3), and chemical broadcast communication (Section 7.2.1). A related constraint applies when
nanodevices attempt to offload endogenously produced or stored
molecules into the local environment, whether by nozzled flow,
reversible sorting rotors, or by simple bulk venting. If the excretion
rate exceeds the solvation capacity of the surrounding solvent,
offloaded gases may coalesce into bubbles and effervesce; offloaded
solids may crystallize.
The inception of bubbles or crystals is a complex physical process
whose detailed description is beyond the scope of this book. However,
the diffusion-limited maximum offloading rate may be conservatively
estimated by considering a point emission source releasing soluble
gas molecules continuously into an aqueous environment at the
constant rate Q (molecules/sec). Once emitted, molecules with
diffusion coefficient D diffuse a distance ∆X ~ (2 D Q-1)
1/2 (Eqns.
3.1 and 3.5), giving a minimum steady state concentration cdiffuse
 (3 / 4 π) (Q / 2 D)3/2 (molecules/m3
). As an approximation at
pressures 100 atm for gases that do not chemically unite with the
solvent, Henry’s law gives the concentration of dissolved gas as
csolvated = Khenry pgas (molecules/m3
), where pgas is the partial pressure of
the solvated gas and Khenry is the Henry’s law constant for the gas
(Table 9.2). If the ambient concentration of the gas in the solvent is
cambient, then the minimum offloading rate Qlimit necessary to
enable the formation of bubbles occurs when cdiffuse  (csolvated-cambient),
or:

Qlimit solvated ambient
2/3
2 D 4
3 ≥ c c (molecules/sec) 

 

( ) − 

 


π
{Eqn. 9.34}
Thus for oxygen dissolving in 0.15M saline (~human blood
plasma), D = 2.0 x 10-9 m2
/sec (Table 3.3), Khenry = 7.4 x 1023
molecules/m3
-atm (Table 9.2), and cambient = 3 x 1022 molecules/m3
(venous plasma; Appendix B), we have Qlimit  8 x 107 molecules/sec
at pgas = 1 atm, or Qlimit  2 x 109 molecules/sec at pgas = 100
atm. Faster offloading rates than Qlimit may cause effervescence.
282 Nanomedicine • Volume I
For carbon dioxide in saline (ambient arterial plasma concentration),
Qlimit  7 x 108 molecules/sec (1 atm) or 1.5 x 1010 molecules/sec
(100 atm). Once a gas bubble is formed and completely blocks a
narrow pipe, the pressure required to dislodge it is approximately
pforce as given by Eqn. 9.24, ~3 atm for an air bubble caught in a 1
micron wide tube carrying water at 310 K.
Similar considerations apply to solute releases which, if too rapid,
may result in crystallization of the solid. In this case, Eqn. 9.34 may
be used if csolvated is taken as the saturation concentration at the
appropriate temperature and pressure. For example, a saturated 70%
glucose solution has csolvated = 7.8 x 1027 molecules/m3
; taking D =
7.1 x 10-10 m2
/sec and cambient = 2.3 x 1024 molecules/m3 (~blood
plasma; Appendix B), Qlimit  1.4 x 1010 molecules/sec.
Gas solubility almost always declines at warmer temperatures
because gas-liquid solvation is exothermic, whereas the solubility of
most solids (including glucose and most important electrolytes)
usually rises at higher temperatures. (See also Section 10.5.3.)
9.2.7 Fluid Pumping and Plumbing
After reviewing specific requirements in nanomechanical systems
for containing fluids within walls and seals, Drexler10 concluded
that nonbonded nanoscale interfaces could serve as seals to permit
the relative motion of surfaces while hindering the flow of fluid
between them. Such fluid-tight seals enable the construction of valves,
pistons and cylinders, and hence fluid pumps. The following is a brief
discussion of several useful classes of general-purpose nanopump
designs. Molecule-specific nanopumps are described in Section 3.4;
biocompatibility issues3234 are deferred to Chapter 15.
9.2.7.1 Pressure Release Pumps
Some form of motive force must be applied to cause fluid to
flow through a tube. The simplest possible motive force is pressurization. Consider a valved cylindrical nozzle of radius rtube and length
ltube attached to a reservoir of volume Vreservoir maintained at a constant
pressurization preservoir (even while being emptied). When the valve
is opened, the fluid vents through the nozzle at a maximum velocity
vmax into an external fluid environment having static pressure pexternal
< preservoir, emptying the reservoir in a time tempty, both given by:

t
8 l V
r (p p ) empty
tube reservoir
tube
4
reservoir external
= −
η
π
{Eqn. 9.35}
{Eqn. 9.36}
Taking pexternal ~ 1 atm, η = 0.6915 x 10-3 kg/m-sec for water at
310 K, rtube = 10 nm and ltube = 100 nm, then holding vmax  10
micron/sec (the velocity of random thermal intracellular hydrodynamic
flows; Section 8.5.3.12) for intracellular discharges requires a driving
pressure of preservoir ~ 0.5 x 10-3 atm, which takes tempty ~ 0.3 sec to
empty the reservoir at an energy cost (Eqn. 9.27) of Pflow tempty ~ 55
zJ (~13 kT). As a practical matter, normal variations in physiological
pressure due to ~1 Hz heartbeat pulse waves are 0.5-10 x 10-3 atm
in the tissues and veins and up to 50-70 x 10-3 atm in the aorta
(Section 4.9.1.2), so either valve aperture or preservoir must be
dynamically controlled if a steady exit velocity is required at such
low discharge velocities. In addition, a minimum pressurization of
~pforce (Eqn. 9.24) must be used to overcome capillary forces and
initiate the flow. Device cooling during rapid gas discharge is
described in Section 5.3.3.
9.2.7.2 Positive Displacement Pumps
Mechanical energy may be converted to fluid flow using a
side-mounted piston as a single-action reciprocating positive displacement pump. Consider a pipe of radius rtube and length ltube, with
valves at either end and a piston mounted in a stub cylinder of
radius rstub mounted perpendicular to the pipe axis at the midpoint
of the pipe length (Fig. 9.1). The valves may be purely passive, or
may be actively controlled in synchronization with piston motions.
During a single pump cycle, the valve at one end of the pipe is
opened and the piston in the stub cylinder is drawn out, sucking a
fluid volume Vcycle from the external environment into the pipe
through the open end. The first valve is then closed, the second
valve at the other end is opened, and the piston is pushed back into
the stub cylinder, forcing an equal volume Vcycle of fluid out through
the opposite end of the pipe which is now open. Cycling this pump
at a frequency νpump establishes a semicontinuous flow of Vpump =
νpump Vcycle, with pumped-fluid velocity vflow and pump power Pflow
given by:

v V
r (m/sec) flow
pump cycle
tube
2 = ν
π
{Eqn. 9.37}

P P 8 l v (watts) flow diss tube flow
2 = + π η {Eqn. 9.38}
where Pdiss is the power dissipation due to piston wall friction, inertia,
and fluid drag (Eqn. 6.13); for submicron pistons and νpump  1 MHz,
Pdiss/ νpump << kT in good designs. From Eqn. 9.25, pumping pressure
is given by ∆p = 8 η ltube vflow / rtube2
.
Operating frequency is restricted by at least four factors:
Table 9.2. Henry’s Law Constants (gas solubility in water at
298 K)390,526,2050
Henry’s Law Constant
Solvated Gas (molecules/m3-atm)
He ~8 x 1022
N2 (0.15M saline) 3.5 x 1023
N2 (pure water) 3.8 x 1023
H2 4.7 x 1023
CO 5.8 x 1023
O2 (0.15M saline) 7.4 x 1023
O2 (pure water) 7.6 x 1023
CH4 8.0 x 1023
C2H6 1.1 x 1024
C2H4 2.9 x 1024
CO2 (0.15M saline) 1.9 x 1025
CO2 (pure water) 2.0 x 1025
C2H2 2.5 x 1025
NH3 1.5 x 1028
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 283
1. The mechanical response time of the fluid defines a maximum
operating frequency of νmax  vsound / (ltube/2); for ltube = 100-1000 nm
and vsound ~ 1500 m/sec in water at 310 K, νmax = 30-3 GHz. (Note
also the requirements that vmax << vsound to avoid acoustic radiation
losses, and that pressure and frequency must be sufficiently limited
to avoid cavitation (Section 6.4.1).)
2. The maximum mechanical operating speed of nanoscale pistons
is, conservatively, νmax ~ GHz.10
3.The maximum acceptable flow velocity vmax defines a maximum
operating frequency νmax = π rtube2
 vmax / Vcycle = vmax / 4 rtube taking
Vcycle ~ (2 rtube)
3 (e.g., one full piston throw opens a volume equal
to one cubic pipe diameter); taking vmax = 4 m/sec, then νmax =
1-100 MHz for rtube ~ rstub = 1000-10 nm.
4. The maximum valving speed of vvalve = 0.01-1 m/sec (Sections
3.2.4 and 3.3.2) when applied to valves of radius rtube defines a
maximum valving frequency of νmax = vvalve / rtube; for rtube = 1000-10
nm, νmax = 0.01-100 MHz.
These considerations suggest that as a conservative limit, νmax ~
1 MHz may be appropriate in nanomedical piston pump designs
that are intended to interact with an aqueous or protoplasmic
external biological environment. Nanorobot piston pumps transferring
durable fluids internally may safely operate at frequencies up to
~GHz and pressures >1000 atm.
From Eqns. 9.37 and 9.38, and taking rtube = 10 nm, ltube = 100
nm, νpump = 1 MHz, η = 0.6915 x 10-3 kg/m-sec for 310 K water,
and Vcycle ~ (2 rtube)
3 = 8000 nm3
, then vflow ~ 3 cm/sec, ∆p = 1.6
atm, and Pflow ~ 1 pW assuming Pdiss << Pflow, which will normally
be the case. The mean pressure amplitude developed during each
piston cycle is ∆ppiston ~ 8 η ltube vflow / rtube2 ~ 1 atm. Reynolds
number NR ~ 0.0004 (Eqn. 9.29), giving laminar flow throughout
the cycle; power losses due to differential compression of the streamlines as fluids curve through an elbow to enter and exit the piston
stub should be negligible. If precise control of flow volume is not
necessary, the active valves described above may be replaced by passive
one-way check valves or flap valves analogous to those found in
human veins (Fig. 8.3).
Many other mechanical positive displacement pumps are readily
imagined—including diaphragm pumps, rotary pumps (valveless),
hydraulic vane pumps (valveless), lobe pumps (valveless), screw
pumps (valveless), reciprocating flap-valve or plunger pumps, bellows
pumps, multiple piston pumps, continuous ciliary2696 or peristaltic
pumps (valveless),1215,1216 and paddlewheel or waterwheel “gear”
pumps (valveless)—all with similar scaling and performance
parameters. The dominance of viscous forces over inertial forces in
fluid flow at small scales favors the use of these positive displacement or
static-type pumps over the use of rotodynamic or kinetic-type pumps
such as centrifugal pumps (with impeller blades) and venturi or jet
pumps (e.g., using a motive fluid, nozzle and diffuser).
9.2.7.3 Turbomolecular Gas Pumps
Drexler10 has briefly reviewed the general design parameters of
nanoscale turbomolecular gas pumps. Pump effectiveness depends
on the ratio of the blade speed to the characteristic thermal speed of
the lightest gas molecule to be pumped. If the blades are constructed
of diamondoid materials, then blades may be as thin as ~1 nm and
blade speed can exceed the velocities of the fastest gas molecules
(e.g., 1960 m/sec for hydrogen at 310 K; Eqn. 3.3), providing a
compression ratio of  10 per blade row.1204Turbomolecular pumps
are designed to operate under free-flow conditions involving essentially
ballistic gas molecule trajectories of length λgas ~ 10 nm at 20 atm
pressure, or λgas ~ 200 nm at 1 atm (Eqn. 9.23). Taking pump length
per blade row ~10 nm for operating pressures up to ~20 atm, a
pump assembly consisting of a stack of five blade disks achieves a
compression ratio of ~105
 in a ~50 nm pump length.
9.2.7.4 Nonmechanical Pumps
Nonmechanical pumps may induce fluid flow without using any
moving parts in direct contact with the fluid. Electrohydrodynamic
(EHD) pumps are one important class of these devices. Several
different types of EHD micropumps have been fabricated.
For example, in the DC-charge injection pump1205-1207 or ion
drag pump,1207-1209 ions are injected into the liquid at an emitting
electrode under high field conditions and move under the influence
of Coulombic forces toward a second collecting electrode where
they are absorbed. Collisions between ions and fluid molecules transfer
momentum from the ions to the fluid, producing fluid movement
in the direction of ion flow. A prototype micropump has achieved a
maximum pumping pressure of 0.01 atm (static) for ethanol flowing
between two (2500 micron)2 grids spaced 10 microns apart at 300
volts, producing a volumetric flow rate of V = 2.7 x 10-11 m3
/sec at
a flow velocity of ~4 microns/sec.1206 Static pump pressure pstatic
may be estimated1208,1209 as:

p ~c
V
d static geom 0 e
2
ε κ 

 

 {Eqn. 9.39}
where cgeom is a correction factor for electrode geometry of order
unity, ε0 = 8.85 x 10-12 farad/m (permittivity constant), κe = dielectric
constant, V is electric potential and d is electrode separation.
Taking V/d ~ 107 volt/m and κe ~ 74.31 for deionized water at 310
K, pstatic ~ 0.7 atm. Pumping of different polar fluids with conductivities between 10-6–10-12 (ohm-m)-1 such as propanol, acetone,
deionized water, and many organic solvents including several oils
has been demonstrated, but aqueous solutions of electrolytes could
Fig. 9.1. Schematic of reciprocating positive displacement pump. not be pumped due to their high ionic conductivity.
284 Nanomedicine • Volume I
In the traveling wave electroconvection voltage pump,1210-1212
phase-shifted rectangular voltages are applied across a series of parallel
electrodes. Temperature induced conductivity gradients induce free
electric charges which can interact with the traveling field due to
charge relaxation processes in the volume of the fluid, causing fluid
flow in a direction transverse to the electrodes. A small monotonic
temperature gradient, which may be produced by the traveling waves
themselves,1212 is also required. Early prototype devices could pump
only nonconductive fluids,1211 but Fuhr et al1212 have demonstrated
EHD pumping of conductive fluids with conductivities between
0.0001-0.1 (ohm-m)-1 (e.g., up to ~0.01M NaCl aqueous solutions)
using high frequencies and a low voltage waveform. Typically,
volumetric flow rates of 10-10–10-12 m3
/sec and flow velocities of
50-1000 micron/sec were achieved using traveling wave frequencies of
0.1-30 MHz at ~ 40 volts across 30 micron-wide electrodes spaced
30 microns apart in 50 x 70 micron square channels ~4000 microns
in length.1212 Flow velocity is a linear function of the square of the
applied voltage and a complex function of the applied frequency.
Further research is required to determine if unfavorable thermal
scaling presents difficulties in submicron-size devices.
Other nonmechanical pumping methods have been studied.
Electroosmotic pumping of electrolyte solutions has been observed
in capillaries 50 microns in diameter or less, and separation of the
components is also possible using electrokinetic phenomena with
applied voltages up to 10,000 volts.1213,1217 Electrowetting pumps
using electrical control of the interfacial surface tension have produced
~0.1 atm flow pressures in 10 micron radius channels.1221 Molecular
flow can be induced by pulsed axial magnetic fields applied to carbon
nanotubes placed in a transverse electric field. Ultrasonic pumps
cause liquid to move in the direction of wave propagation with a
speed proportional to the square of the acoustic amplitude;1214,1215
speeds of 130 micron/sec have been observed in water at 3.5
MHz.1214 Ferrofluids1241 containing ~10 nm particles in suspension
and electrorheological fluids1242 allow electrostatic control of fluid
flow via the Winslow effect,1243 although early reports that blood
flow could be electrostatically regulated have not yet been confirmed
experimentally.1244 Osmotic-pump motility across sugar gradients
has been induced in micron-size phospholipid vesicles.3269
Optofluidic pumping is extremely energy inefficient and is feasible
only at dangerously high beam intensities. Consider a beam of light
of radius rbeam and intensity Ibeam that exerts a photon-pressure force
of Fbeam = π rbeam2
 ka Ibeam / c, where c = 3 x 108 m/sec (speed of
light) and ka = 0 for total transmission, 1 for total absorption, and 2
for total reflection. Setting this equal to the Stokes law force (Eqn.
9.73) on a spherical target of radius rbeam in a fluid of absolute viscosity
η gives the approximate magnitude of the fluid flow velocity as:

v ~ k r I
6 c flow a beam beam
η
{Eqn. 9.40}
if we conservatively assume that dimensionless ka ~ rbeam σa where
σa ~ 300 m-1 (optical absorption coefficient; Section 4.9.4). Taking
Ibeam ~1011 W/m2 (~optical tweezer intensity; compare maximum
“safe” in vivo intensity of 105 watts/m2
, Section 6.4.3.2) and rbeam
= 200 nm giving ka ~6 x 10-5 (almost complete transmission), then
vflow ~ 1 micron/sec but with a huge power dissipation of π rbeam2
Ibeam ~10 milliwatts while developing a pumping pressure of only
pbeam ~ka Ibeam / c = 2 x 10-7 atm.
9.2.7.5 Fluid Mixing
In nanofluidic systems (e.g., pipes, chambers and junctions) of
size L  100 nm, even with strictly laminar flow, mixing of separate
fluid streams is rapid because the small-molecule diffusion time
τ  10 microsec (Eqn. 3.1 and Table 3.4). At the other extreme,
systems of characteristic size L  1000 microns with vflow  1.4
m/sec may readily establish a turbulent flow with NR  2000 in
water at 310 K (Eqn. 9.29), and again mixing of multiple fluid
streams can be quite rapid.
However, for systems of scale 1000 microns > L > 100 nm,
diffusion times range from 10-5–103 sec for small molecules, and
even longer for large molecules. Nonlaminar flow would demand
unreasonably high fluid velocities, and diffusive stirring (Section
3.2.3.1) yields only modest improvements in mixing. To achieve
rapid mixing in this intermediate size range, a micromixer chamber
is first filled with one liquid, and then the other liquid is injected
into the chamber volume simultaneously through a large number
of very small nozzles. In the simplest micromixer designs the mixing
nozzles form a regular coplanar array.1219 In more complex designs,
mixing nozzles will form a three-dimensional array possibly using a
branching tree or fractal geometry with tip spacing ~1 micron to
allow fully intimate mixing to be completed in ~1000 microsec; a
~100 nm tip spacing allows complete mixing in ~10 microsec.
9.2.7.6 Nanoplumbing and Fluidic Circuits
In fluid distribution systems that minimize total energy dissipation
in laminar nonpulsatile flow, space-filling fractal networks of
branching tubes are most efficient.3242 Ateach branch point in such
a network, where a single large tube of radius R bifurcates into N
branches with each branch tube having radii r1, r2,..., rN, Murray1220
found that shear stresses are equalized and flow impedance is
minimized when:

R r r ... r 3
1
3
2
3
N
3 = + ++ {Eqn. 9.41}
In the special case where r = r1 = r2 = ... = rN, which is quite common in
biological systems, Murray’s law reduces to R3 = N r3
. For example,
the human bronchial system typically has N = 2, so the ideal fractal
network has R/r ~ N1/3 = 1.26; from Table 8.7, the actual value
from trachea (generation 0) through the terminal bronchiole in
generation 16 (after which alveoli begin to appear irregularly) is
R/r = 1.24, in good agreement with Murray’s law. In turbulent flow
regimes, the exponent on Murray’s law becomes 2.33, rather than
3.1615 And in pulsatile flow through elastic tubes, which dominates
the aorta and major arteries in the human circulatory system, the
energy minimization principle requires area-preserving branching,
or R2
 = N r2
 for the ideal network.698
Complex nanoscale fluidic logic devices are readily imagined. While
fractal geometries are likely, for simplicity consider a three-dimensional
fluidic circuit of volume Vcircuit. A volume fraction ftube consists of Ntube
independent fluidic pathways each of length ltube and radius rtube, and a
second volume fraction fvalve consists of Nvalve fluidic gates each
of volume Lvalve
3
. If each independent fluidic pathway is gated, on
average, by a single valve, then Ntube = Nvalve = N = fvalve Vcircuit / Lvalve
3
and ltube = (ftube / π fvalve) (Lvalve
3 / rtube2
). Ignoring reservoirs, inlet and
outlet manifolds and support mechanisms, and taking Vcircuit = 1
micron3
, ftube = 0.9, fvalve = 0.1, Lvalve = 20 nm, rtube = 10 nm, and η =
0.6915 x 10-3 kg/m-sec for water at 310 K, then the fluidic circuit
includes Nvalve = 12,500 fluidic gates and Ntube = 12,500 independent
fluidic pathways each of length ltube = 230 nm. If typical flow velocity
vflow = 1 mm/sec,1228 then from Section 9.2.5 the total volume flow
rate through the circuit is N VHP ~ 4000 micron3
/sec at a pressure
differential ∆p = 0.1 atm. Circuit power dissipation (ignoring valve
dissipation) is N Pflow ~50 pW and tflow ~0.2 millisec assuming fully
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 285
parallel operation (e.g., a path length ltube), allowing a circuit operating frequency of tflow-1 ~ 5000 Hz.
Capillary networks are readily gated by applying appropriate
voltages, allowing valveless switching of liquid flow among various
fluidic pathways. Purely electrical valving of fluid flows has been
common practice in neurobiological research for decades. For
example, the flow of acetylcholine from the open end of a
micron-sized pipette (as it is inserted into tissue) is prevented by
applying a negative bias or braking current of 3 nanoamps at the
tip; flow resumes when the braking current is removed.803
Constant-discharge flow-control valves using opposing polymer
brushes with ~25 chains of ~40 monomers each2902 and micron-scale
electrorheological diodes498 have been investigated. Macroscale fluidic
NOR logic elements that can be used to construct arbitrary Boolean
logic circuits* (for controlling materials flow) are widely available
commercially,1227 although these often employ the Coanda effect,
vortices, or turbulence effects, which generally don’t scale well to
micron and submicron devices. In 1997, a microfluidic chip-based
system for the integration of high-throughput drug discovery
efforts was demonstrated by SmithKline Beecham and Orchid
Biocomputer.1222 This microfluidic chip incorporated
microfabricated components for valving and pumping of organic
solvents using electrokinetic transport within a three-dimensional
fluidic network. The pumping and valving mechanisms had no
moving parts, “making large scale integration feasible and inherently
reliable.” The study of microfluidic networks1228,2697,2698 using
hundreds of micron-wide channels was an active research area in
1998, and integrated chemical systems were being widely discussed.121
 9.2.7.7 Containerized Flow
Once a block of fluid has passed into the interior of a nanodevice,
it may be containerized or divergently subdivided and then transported
at velocities far higher than diffusive flow (Eqn. 3.1) or Poiseuille
flow (Eqn. 9.25) would otherwise permit. The velocities available
in containerized flows are largely independent of fluid viscosity and
total transport time (unlike diffusive flow), and are nearly independent
of fluid pressure and flow channel length (unlike Poiseuille flow).
For easy comparison, consider a disk-shaped container of radius
rblock and thickness hblock with useful fractional storage volume fblock
(to account for container wall thickness and mechanism overhead).
After loading with fluid, the container is transported through a
channel of radius rtube ~ rblock and length ltube at a velocity vblock,
giving a volumetric flow rate of Vblock = π rtube2
 fblock vblock (m3
/sec)
which is superior to the Poiseuille flow rate in a pressurized tube of
equivalent size when:

v r p
8 l f block
tube
2
tube block
> ∆
η
{Eqn. 9.42}
Containerized transport thus may be preferred to Poiseuille flow
in narrow, long transport channels, or in cases where fluid pressure
is relatively low or fluid viscosity is relatively high, or where containers
can be very thin-walled (e.g., high fblock) such as when strong
diamondoid containers are used. For example, a containerized
transport channel carrying water at 310 K with rtube = 10 nm, ltube
= 1 micron, ∆p = 1 atm, and fblock = 0.9 produces volume flow rates
superior to Poiseuille flow if container transport velocity vblock > 0.002
m/sec. Container/channel sliding interfaces moving up to 1 m/sec
havelow frictional losses,10 and speeds up to ~100 m/sec can probably
be tolerated in internal mechanisms if flow speed (entirely inside
nanodevices) is a more important design criterion than minimizing
power dissipation in a particular application. An additional consideration is that subdividing a volume of fluid into many smaller
blocks of fluid allows these smaller blocks to be transported
independently through numerous spatially independent channels
of much smaller bore, greatly increasing the number of flow design
options and greatly increasing the relative advantage over Poiseuille
flow through channels of similar size.
9.3 Nanomanipulators
Numerous simple actuators have been developed for
microelectromechanical systems or MEMS.1232,1253-1255,1267-1269 A
few of these designs might possibly be useful in early nanomedical
systems. All major components of an articulated micromanipulator
having multiple degrees of freedom, workspaces on the order of
1 mm3
, positional resolution up to ~10 nm, operating frequencies
up to 10 KHz, and slewing speeds up to 4 mm/sec have been
demonstrated experimentally; complete systems have even been
proposed.346,1253,1254
Actuation and manipulation may be very broadly defined. For
example, self-assembling and self-disassembling ~300 micron gold
foil cubes have been fabricated and cycled repeatedly at ~1 Hz;1251
“silicon origami” has also been described.1382 Nonmechanical
actuation has also been explored. In the Magnetic Stereotaxis System,1256
a helmet with a cubic array of six superconducting coils is used to
apply a 0.2 N force to a 3.2-mm wide, 4.7-mm long permanently
magnetized cylindrical pellet that is embedded in brain material,
causing stepped movement of the pellet through the brain material
to a specified location with ~1 mm placement accuracy without any
direct physical contact.
However, in the usual definition of a manipulator, an
ergomechanical transducer (e.g., motors; Chapter 6) converts
chemical, electrical, mechanical, acoustical, or some other form of
energy into the mechanical energy of a manipulatory device which
then exerts useful forces on objects or materials in the environment.
In most cases a force-transmitting physical structure is required which
may include both heavy load-bearing elements such as girders, struts,
pneumatic tubes or rotary joints, and fine control elements such as
stress cables, valves or switches (Section 9.3.1). An end-effector (e.g.,
gripper, cutter or molecular jig) is usually employed to focus and
redirect the application of force at the distal end of the manipulation
device (Section 9.3.2), or to perform specialized tasks. Sensors
permit feedback control of manipulator motions as well as verification
that the assigned manipulatory task has been properly executed
(Section 9.3.3). Large numbers of manipulators can form ciliary
arrays, allowing convenient mass transport of materials (Section
9.3.4); other classes of manipulators may be useful in bulk disassembly
of materials (Section 9.3.5).
The diverse concepts outlined in this Section demonstrate
the enormous range of possible nanomanipulator designs. These
concepts are not intended as specific engineering proposals but
rather as illustrations of certain useful classes of manipulators
representing alternative design pathways that could provide the
desired capability. No effort has been made to produce optimal
systems that minimize energy dissipation, maximize speed, minimize
parts count, or simplify manufacture. Biocompatibility issues3234
will be addressed in Chapter 15.
* In the 1950s, Marvin Minsky and Rollo Silver289 built a “hydroflip computer” using hydraulic logic elements consisting of millimeter-wide grooves and holes in multiple layers
of plastic sheets with small rods and balls inserted in some of the grooves. When the assembly was pressed together and connected to a water supply, it became a hydraulic
computer powered by a 3-inch high column of water, operating at ~30 Hz.
286 Nanomedicine • Volume I
9.3.1 Nanoscale Manipulators
9.3.1.1 Biological Cilia
Biological cilia are motile, hairlike cylindrical processes typically
200-300 nm in diameter, 2-20 microns in length, and ~10-16–10-15 kg
in mass.338,396,936,939,1394,1449 They are found in large numbers on
some cell surfaces. Unicellular organisms use cilia both for locomotion
and for food collection, while multicellular organisms use cilia
primarily for mass transport of the environment past the cell.
Each cilium is bounded by an extension of the cellular plasma
membrane (Fig. 9.2A), rising from a cytoskeletally-anchored
centriole-like basal body consisting of an array of 9 triplets of
common-walled microtubules ~150 nm in diameter and 300-500
nm in length. Sprouting upward from the basal body is the primary
ciliary structure, called the axoneme. The axoneme is a cylinder of
microtubules (Section 8.5.3.11) with 9 outer doublets of microtubules
and two additional complete microtubules in the center, often called
the central pair (Fig. 9.2B). The 9 outer doublets are extensions of
two of the three microtubules comprising each of the nine basal
body triplets. Each outer doublet of the axoneme consists of the A
tubule (a complete 25-nm outer-diameter microtubule with the usual
13 protofilaments made of tubulin dimers), the B tubule (an
incomplete microtubule with only 10-11 protofilaments), and a common wall containing the protein tektin (an intermediate-filament-like
protein with high tensile strength) (Fig. 9.2C).
A set of 1-2 megadalton dynein side arms project outward from
each of the A tubules, reaching clockwise toward the B tubules of
the adjacent doublet (Fig. 9.2D). The dynein arms occur in pairs,
one inner arm and one outer arm, spaced at regular ~30 nm intervals
along the microtubule. Nexin protein interdoublet links at wider
intervals join the outer doublets making circumferential rings, and
radial spokes project inward from each of the 9 microtubule doublets.
Microtubules do not change length during ciliary movement. Rather,
the stalk of each dynein arm attaches to and detaches from the
adjacent B tubule in an ATP-driven cyclic process,3551-3554 pulling
the stalk the length of one dimer along the tubule with a velocity of
~14 microns/sec.1450 The maximum force generated by a dynein
arm has been measured as ~1 pN.452The differential stress of adjacent
doublet columns causes the axoneme to flex. Selective sidearm
bonding and unbonding allows the cilium to generate a bend
anywhere along its length.
In early experiments, bullfrog gullet ciliary surfaces developed a
mechanical motive power of ~0.01 watts/m2
;
526 assuming 1-10
micron2
/cilium across the gullet surface gives an estimated mechanical
power output Pcilium ~ 0.01-0.1 pW/cilium. Similarly, hair cell cilia
of the human inner ear446 respond to a minimum 2 x 10-5 N/m2
(2 x 10-10 atm) pressure with a minimum 0.1 nm deflection at an
applied force of ~10-3 pN, indicating a mechanical stiffness of
~10-5 N/m. (Axoneme bending moment is ~7 x 10-17 N-m.1449)
Assuming a maximum Dp ~ 105 watts/m3 power density in nonmuscular working tissue (Table 6.8) and a ciliary volume of ~0.1-1
micron3 also gives an estimated mechanical power output of Pcilium
~ 0.01-0.1 pW/cilium.
A simple cilium 12 microns long may beat at a frequency νcilium ~
30 Hz with an angular velocity of 12 deg/millisec and a tip velocity of
2500 microns/sec in the effective stroke, while the bend in the
recovery stroke propagates at ~350 microns/sec.1394 (A 600-micron long
compound cilium beats at ~20 Hz with angular velocity 10 deg/millisec
and a 17 mm/sec recovery stroke.1394) Taking Pcilium ~ 0.05 pW and
vcilium ~500 microns/sec , then Fcilium ~ Pcilium / vcilium ~ 0.1 nN.
9.3.1.2 Nanocilium Manipulators
Equally complex nanomechanical ciliary systems could probably
be designed. But for simplicity, consider a nanociliary manipulator
patterned more closely after the muscular trunk of the elephant or
tentacle of the squid1231 and based only loosely on the biological
cilium. The model consists of a cylindrical central shaft of radius
rshaft and length lshaft, the tip of which is bonded to one or more
conduited shaft-attached control cables (radius rcable) whose lengths
and tensions can be predictably altered, causing the shaft to flex. A
cable pulled with a force Fcable applies a transverse deflection force
to the nanocilium shaft of approximate magnitude Fdeflect ~ (rcable/lshaft)
Fcable for small deflections. The force required to deflect the terminus of
a simple cantilevered rod is Fdeflect = 3 Eshaft Ishaft d / lshaft
3
, where Eshaft
is Young’s modulus and Ishaft = π rshaft
4 / 4 is the second moment of
area (also known as the moment of inertia of the area) for a shaft of
circular cross-section.364 Solving for the deflection gives:

d 4
3
r l F
E r
cable shaft
2
cable
shaft shaft
4 = 

 







 π
{Eqn. 9.43}
and a deflection angle θshaft = tan-1 (d / lshaft). The shaft begins to
buckle when Fcable exceeds the Euler force:364

F E I
l
E r
4 l buckle
2
shaft shaft
cable
2
3
shaft shaft
4
shaft
2 = = π π {Eqn. 9.44}
Fig. 9.2. Diagrammatic representation of the structure of a biological cilium (modified from Cormack936 and Becker and Deamer939).
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 287
The maximum force that can be transmitted through a
diamondoid cable of circular cross-section and tensile strength536
Tstr = 1.9 x 1011 N/m2 with rcable = 1 nm is Fmax = π rcable2
 Tstr = 600
nN. (For hollow cylinders of inside radius r and outside radius R,
rshaft
4 should be replaced by (R4 - r4
) in Eqn. 9.44.)
For a large nanocilium, we take rshaft = 50 nm, lshaft = 1000 nm,
and Eshaft ~ 108 N/m2 (~tendon strength521). At maximum deflection
where Fcable = Fmax ~ 600 nN, then d ~ 400 nm, θshaft ~ 22˚, and
bending stiffness kshaft = Fdeflect / d = (3 π / 4) (Eshaft rshaft
4 / lshaft
3
) ~
0.001 nN/nm. Maximum lateral force that may be applied by the
nanocilium tip is Fdeflect ~ 0.6 nN; setting this force equal to the
Stokes law force (Eqn. 9.73) gives a maximum nanocilium velocity
through water of ~10 cm/sec. If cable tension is uniformly distributed
over a shaft endplate of radius rshaft, the maximum mechanical pressure
is pshaft = Fmax / π rshaft2 = 8 x 107 N/m2 < Eshaft. Shaft buckling commences at Fbuckle ~ 5 nN with d = 3 nm and θshaft = 0.2˚; classical
positional variance of the tip due to thermal noise10 is ∆x = (kT /
kshaft)
1/2 ~ 2 nm, very close to the minimum deflection at buckling.
If the control cable may be moved at vcable ~ 1 m/sec, then maximum
nanocilium operating frequency νmax ~ vcilium / rshaft = 20 MHz;
however, power dissipation is at least Pcilium ~ Fmax rshaft νcilium = 30
pW at an operating frequency νcilium = 1 KHz, plus up to ~60 pW
of Stokes frictional dissipation (Eqn. 9.74) at the maximum ~10
cm/sec tip velocity.
For a very small nanocilium, we take rshaft = 10 nm, lshaft = 100
nm, and Eshaft = 1010 N/m2 where Fcable = Fmax ~ 600 nN, then d =
25 nm, θcable = 14˚, kshaft = 0.2 nN/nm, Fdeflect = 6 nN, pshaft = 2 x
109
 N/m2
 < Eshaft, Fbuckle = 78 nN, ∆x = 0.1 nm, maximum νmax ~
100 MHz and Pcilium = 6 pW at νcilium = 1 KHz. Maximum Stokes
velocity in water is ~10 m/sec, but even at ~1 cm/sec the Stokes
power dissipation is an additional ~6 pW.
Coiling the cable around the flexible shaft permits twisting motions
to be imparted to the manipulator. Attachment of at least three
control cables (at 120˚ circumferential intervals) allows full spherical
angular coordinate steering of tip position. Adding additional control
cable triplets on successive connection rings spaced along the length
of the shaft allows independent addressing of intermediate shaft
segments to permit the shaft to flex into a variety of sinuous shapes
with some additional control of total radial extension. Two orthogonal
pairs of tensioned cables attached on either side to ball joints separating
each segment gives a more complex but highly redundant and highly
controllable articulated manipulator (Fig. 9.3).
9.3.1.3 Pneumatic Manipulators
Differential tensions also can be applied to a nanomanipulator
structure using gases (e.g., pneumatic actuators) or liquids (e.g.,
hydraulic actuators). Nanoscale pneumatic actuator elements must
be of size L >> λgas (Eqn. 9.23) to ensure continuum flow. Thus for
L ~ 1 micron, minimum pneumatic operating pressure pgas >> 0.2
atm; for L = 10 nm, minimum pgas >> 24 atm.
There are many examples of pressurized hydraulic tissue inflation
in macroscale biology, including sea anemones, nematodes, echinoderm tube feet, spider legs, pupal butterfly wing extension, piscine
swim bladders, and human sex organs. The pressurized pumping of
DNA through a nanotube in the T4 bacteriophage has already been
described (Section 9.2.4). As another possible example in
nanobiology, the sperm of the sea cucumber Thyone rapidly elongates
its ~700-nm wide spherical acrosomal vesicle into a 50-nm wide,
90-micron long tubular acrosomal process in less than 10 sec after a
rapid influx of water doubles the volume of the 0.5 micron3 acrosomal
cup in which the vesicle is stored in 50-70 millisec (Fig. 9.4). This
has led to the proposal that the elongation is at least partly hydraulically driven by a profilactin osmotic pressure of ~0.5 atm, because
the speed of actin polymerization alone appears to be about an
order of magnitude too slow.1230
Nanoscale manipulators may be constructed of simple
orthotropic tubes with flexible ribbing and an elastic but
nonextensible spine that allows manipulator flexure in only one
direction when pressurized (Fig. 9.5). Experiments using compound
manipulators constructed using centimeter-sized pneumatic
orthotropic segments that were pressurized to 3-6 atm produced
90˚ flexures in 0.3-1 sec with 2-5 mm placement accuracy
(0.4%-0.9%) and load-bearing strengths up to ~20 N at the tip.1231
Suzumori et al1232 have constructed, tested and analyzed a simple
but elegant pneumatic manipulator ~4 mm in diameter that should
be readily adaptable to the microscopic scale. As shown in Figure
9.6, the manipulator consists of a flexible cylinder made of three
separate 120˚-sector longitudinal chambers that are permanently
bonded together. Each chamber may be independently pressurized
or depressurized through flexible tubes connected to pressure control
valves. In the first configuration, purely circumferential reinforcing
fibers (winding angle α = 0˚) allow the tri-chambered manipulator
to easily deform in the axial direction, while resisting deformation
in the radial direction. Pressure applied equally to the three chambers
thus causes axial stretching. Pressure applied to only one chamber
causes the manipulator to bend away from that chamber, so the
device can be flexed in any direction by controlling the pressure in
Fig. 9.3. Two-dimensional representation of segmented 3-D
manipulator using ball joints (modified from Ma et al1233).
Fig. 9.4. Schematic of the acrosomal process in Thyone (modified
from Oster and Perelson1230).
288 Nanomedicine • Volume I
the three chambers. In a second configuration, spiral reinforcing
fibers (α = 5˚-20˚) force a circumaxial rotation of the cylinder when
chamber pressure is applied, allowing useful screwing motions to
be generated at the tip. Thus the manipulator can achieve pitch,
yaw, stretch, and rotation, although these four movements are not
fully independent because there are only three independent control
parameters.
Consider the tri-chambered pneumatic manipulator of Figure
9.6 with one end fixed, α = 0˚, tube radius rtube, tube wall thickness
twall, and chambers of equal relaxed length L0 along the center axis
that are then pressurized to p1, p2, and p3, respectively. The
fiber-reinforced tube wall material has Young’s modulus Etube in the
transverse direction. Then the x-y projection of manipulator rotation
around the vertical axis (θ) is given by:

θ = − −
−





 − tan 2p p p
3 (p p
1 123
1/2
2 3 )
{Eqn. 9.45}
For each of the three chambers, θ1 = θ, θ2 = θ + (2 π / 3), and θ3 =
θ - (2 π / 3). The angular deflection of the manipulator down from
the vertical axis (ϕ) is the same for all three chambers, given as:

ϕ = L
R
manip
curve
{Eqn. 9.46}
Lmanip is the new stretched length of the manipulator at the center
axis, Rcurve is the radius of curvature of the manipulator, and the
linear deflection from the vertical axis is:

d ( = 1− ϕ cos( )) Rcurve {Eqn. 9.47}
where:

L (L )L r L
36 E manip (p ) 0 2
0 manip
tube 0
tube i
− − i


 

 ∑ = π {Eqn. 9.48}

R ~ 9 E
2
 r 2 L
(p sin( )) curve tube tube manip
i
π i i
π
θ


 

 +
∑










{Eqn. 9.49}
and Eqn. 9.48 is readily evaluated using the quadratic formula.
Making a few simplifying assumptions, the bending stiffness of the
manipulator is given approximately as:

k ~ 3 E t r
L tube
1/2
tube wall tube
3
manip
3
π {Eqn. 9.50}
and thus the maximum force that can be exerted at the tip is:
Ftip = ktube d {Eqn. 9.51}
Finally, the lowest resonant frequency νres of a tri-chambered
pneumatic manipulator of mean density ρmanip, mass Mmanip ~ π
rtube2
 L0 ρmanip, and carrying a tip load of Mload is given by:1232

ν
π res tube tube
2
manip
3
load manip
1/2
3 E I
4 L (M 0.236 M ) ~ (Hz) +






{Eqn. 9.52}
where the second moment of area Itube ~ (1/4) π rtube
4 + (1/2) Lmanip
rtube
3
. Manipulator power requirement in the absence of a viscous
operating medium is:
Fig. 9.5. Flexible ribbed orthotropic tube manipulator (modified
from Wilson et al1231).
Fig. 9.6. Schematic design of tri-chambered pneumatic manipulator
(modified from Suzumori, Iikura, and Tanaka1232).
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 289

P ~ manip tip manip manip 0 F ν − (L L ) (watts) {Eqn. 9.53}
where νmanip is manipulator operating frequency.
As an example of a nanomedically useful pneumatic manipulator,
consider a tri-chamber design with L0 = 1200 nm, rtube = 200 nm,
twall = 50 nm, Etube = 108 N/m2
, and maximum operating pressures
up to ~1000 atm (pressure/volume relationships for air calculated
using the ideal gas law are ~5% in error at 100 atm, ~50% in error
at 1000 atm; Table 10.2). Application of a p1 = 6 atm pressure pulse
to one chamber of the manipulator produces an Ftip ~ 0.1 nN lateral
force and a d ~ 1 nm tip displacement at zero load, costing ~3 kT/cycle
at T = 310 K. Application of a 60 atm pulse produces ~1 nN and a
10 nm displacement (~300 kT/cycle); a 600 atm pressure step
produces a ~10 nN force and a 100 nm no-load tip displacement at
an energy cost of ~30,000 kT/cycle or Pmanip ~ 100 pW continuous
power draw at νmanip = 1 MHz. Minimum driving pressure increments
of ~6 atm (~3 kT/cycle) allow the manipulator tip to be reliably
positioned in repeatable step sizes of ~1 nm, well above the classical
positional variance of the tip due to thermal noise10 which is ∆x =
(kT / kshaft)
1/2 ~ 0.2 nm, given a bending stiffness of ktube ~ 0.1 N/m
for this design.
Manipulator volume is ~0.15 micron3 and manipulator mass
Mmanip ~ 0.1 picogram. At zero load in vacuo, νres ~ 30 MHz up to
~1000 atm; νres falls to ~5 MHz for a 1 picogram load (roughly the
mass of a 1 micron3 nanorobot) and to ~1 MHz for a ~30 picogram
load, so up to ~MHz operating frequencies seem reasonable at modest
loads. (For comparison, a 1 nN lifting force supports a 100,000
picogram mass against gravity.) At maximum cyclical tip displacement
d = 100 nm and νmanip = 1 MHz, mean tip velocity is vtip ~ d νmanip
= 10 cm/sec. Maximum viscous drag power in vivo is Pdrag ~ 140
pW using the formula for Stokes frictional dissipation (Eqn. 9.74)
at a 10 cm/sec tip velocity and taking r ~ (2 rtube L0)
1/2 for the
manipulator and η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec in tissue plasma at 310 K.
The pneumatic design outlined above is quite versatile. Manipulator tip displacement scales as d ~ L0 p / Etube. Manipulator tip force
scales as Ftip ~ rtube
3 / L0
2
; tip force is nearly independent of Etube
down to Etube ~ 108 N/m2
, below which Ftip falls rapidly. Pneumatic
nanomanipulators using diamondoid wall materials (e.g., Etube ~1011
N/m2
) can have a stiffness on the order of kmanip ~ 10-100 nN/nm
(comparable to the telescoping manipulator described in Section
9.3.1.4), although in such cases the maximum pneumatic tip displacement even at maximum operating pressures may be limited to ~1
nm or less. Longitudinal cables can be added to actively control the
helical pitch (e.g., α) of the reinforcing fibers;529 adding both
circumferential and longitudinal reinforcing fibers allows deformation
of compliant tube structures into multiply-coiled shapes.1255 Adding
tensioned control cables and additional layers of pneumatic chambers
can give a full six degrees-of-freedom (DOF) manipulator, albeit with
some increased complexity of the mechanism. Control of individual
axial segments (e.g., selective locking/unlocking or differing Young’s
moduli of adjacent segments) allows arbitrary serpentine flexures
through a three-dimensional work volume (Fig. 9.7). End effector
control lines may be routed along the central axis.
Many interesting designs for “tentacle” or “snake” manipulators,
also known as highly-redundant or hyper-redundant manipulators,
have appeared in the literature.1231,1233,1270-1273,1625,2387 These may
be fabricated as stacks of multiple pneumatic segments connected
coaxially. A biological snake may have ~200 separate jointed segments,
though each joint has a pitch range of only ± 10˚; snake robots
having artificial joints with pitch ranges up to 135˚ have been
built.1625 Such designs are useful in nanomedical robotic systems
because hyper-redundant manipulators can be made extremely
fail-safe—if one joint fails (e.g., by locking tight, not falling limp,
by design), the accessible work volume is not significantly diminished.
9.3.1.4 Telescoping Manipulators
Another useful class of manipulators is the telescoping design
(Fig. 5.14), in which snugly fitted or threaded components
extend or retract via sliding motions induced either pneumatically
or by shaft-driven rotations of linked elements.
The best-known telescoping nanomanipulator design has been
proposed by Drexler10 in the context of a stiff mechanism that may
be used for precision molecular positioning and assembly work. As
depicted in Figure 9.8, the mechanism features a central telescoping
joint whose extension and retraction is controlled by a 1.5-nm
diameter drive shaft. The rapid rotation of this drive shaft (up to ~1
m/sec tangential velocity) forces a transmission gear to quickly
execute a known number of turns, causing the telescoping joint to
slowly unscrew or screw in the axial direction, thus lengthening
or contracting the manipulator. Additionally, two pairs of canted
rotary joints—one pair between the telescoping section and the
base, the other pair between the telescoping section and the
Fig. 9.7. Range of motion of “pneumatic snake” manipulator with
direct segment control.
Fig. 9.8. Schematic cross-section of a telescoping nanomanipulator
(adapted from Drexler10).
290 Nanomedicine • Volume I
working tip—are controlled by toroidal worm drives. These joints
enable a wide variety of complex angular motions and give full
6-DOF access to the work envelope (Fig. 9.9; isolated planetary
gear (Section 2.4.1) shown at lower left, for comparison). By engaging and disengaging various drive shafts using clutches, these shafts
can be made to turn through a known number of rotations between
locked states giving odometer-like control of manipulator joint rotations. The power supply and drive shaft control systems originate
outside the manipulator, thus are not subject to tight geometric
constraints.
Drexler’s telescoping manipulator is approximately cylindrical
in shape with an outside diameter of ~35 nm and an extensible
length from 90 nm to 100 nm measured from top of base to working
tip. The manipulator includes a hollow circular channel 7 nm in
diameter to allow tool tips and materials to be moved from below
the manipulator through the base up to the working tip. At the tip,
a slightly larger region is reserved for a mechanism to allow positioning
and locking of tool tips. Device mass is ~10-19 kg, and the manipulator
is constructed of ~4 x 106 atoms excluding the base and external
power and control structures. Device stiffness (which scales roughly
with arm length10) is ks ~ 25 nN/nm, so that a force of 1 nN may be
applied with an elastic deflection in the arm of only 0.04 nm. The
classical positional variance of the manipulator at T = 310 K is ∆x ~
(kT / ks)
1/2 ~ 0.01 nm, although with a manipulator tube segment
thread pitch of 0.5 nm and drive shafts that execute ~700 turns to
produce a single tube segment rotation, segment extension may be
altered in ~0.001 nm steps. The workspace includes a 180˚
hemispherical-shell volume ~100 nm in diameter and ~10 nm deep.
Conveyance of the tip through a full 100-nm arc requires ~10
microsec at a conservative ~1 cm/sec arm speed. Efficient task planning
permits much smaller motion arcs, allowing ~MHz operating
frequencies. The manipulator dissipates 0.1 pW of power (power
density ~109 watts/m3
) while in motion under no-load conditions.
Energy dissipated per unit mass of delivered payload is scale-invariant,
and the design of telescoping manipulators generally becomes easier
with increasing size.10 Power dissipation scales roughly as the square
of arm length and as the square of tip velocity;10 power density
scales inversely with arm length.
Like the ciliary and pneumatic designs, the telescoping
manipulator is hermetically sealed, thus maintaining a controlled
internal environment while allowing leakproof operation in vivo.
9.3.1.5 Stewart Platform Manipulators
Another class of simple manipulators is the 6-DOF Stewart
platform.1237,1238The Stewart platform exploits the geometry of an
octahedron—one triangular face serves as a mobile platform and
the opposing triangular face serves as the fixed base. Six struts of the
octahedron connect the base to the platform and can be varied in
length, thus controlling platform position and orientation with
respect to the base. The six struts carry only compressive or tensile,
but no bending, forces. Figure 9.10 shows a two-dimensional analog
with three struts and 3 DOF to illustrate a portion of the available
range of motions. This 5 x 10-20 kg device has pressure-actuated
vernier ratchets that allow strut lengths to be altered in ~0.1 nm
increments across a 100-nm work envelope, providing excellent
positional control.10 Merkle1239 has examined a novel family of
6-DOF positional control devices—the double tripod configuration—
which offers greater stiffness for a given structural mass than a
robotic arm and significantly greater range of motion than a Stewart
platform. Tradeoffs between stiffness and range of motion in the
double tripod can be continuously adjusted by altering simple
design parameters.
Assembly of parts while immersed in a fluid eliminates electrostatic and surface tension effects.1150 In the earliest, most primitive
Stewart platform type nanomanipulators operating in aqueous
suspension, R. Merkle suggests that leg extension and retraction
may be controlled by manufacturing the legs using a repeating
sequence of binding sites on the surfaces of two opposing struts.
Chemical binding molecules are designed that can selectively link
one strut to another, but only between one specific pair of binding
sites (one site on each strut). Varying the linking agent controls
which part of a strut links to the adjacent strut; cycling of link molecule
types in solution forces the linking and unlinking in such a way as
to move the struts along.1303
9.3.1.6 Metamorphic Manipulators
Metamorphic manipulators (Section 5.3.1.3) are fully
reconfigurable manipulative or locomotive appendages that can be
deployed from compact storage volumes. Surface area, contour,
volume, length, and stiffness of the protuberance may be varied at
~KHz frequencies (Section 5.3.1.4). Metamorphic manipulators
exuded from a nanorobot surface may temporarily assume many
forms including arms/legs, hands/fingers, barriers and surrounds,
Fig. 9.9. External shape and range of motion of a telescoping
nanomanipulator (adapted from Drexler10).
Fig. 9.10. Two-dimensional schematic of the range of motion of a
Stewart platform manipulator (adapted from Drexler10).
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 291
grapples, bubbles, and a wide variety of geometric shapes, all under
programmatic or stochastic control (Section 9.3.3).
Many examples of highly plastic protuberances are known in
microbiology at many size scales, such as the pseudopods of fibroblasts
and amoebas (an amoebic pseudopod can extend and engulf a
100-micron paramecium in ~10 sec,1252 applying a stress force1462
up to ~2900 N/m2
), blebbing and microspikes,938 the ~40 nm
import receptors (cytoplasmic filaments) ringing the mouth of the
nuclear pore complex,1264 cyclosis in giant green algae cells at
velocities up to 100 microns/sec,938 and the flexible plasma membrane
extensions that occur during amoeboid locomotion (Section 9.4.3.7).
Human axons elongate at ~10 nm/sec.1240 The green plastid
tubules of chloroplasts in plant cells are yet another example. These
tubular projections arise initially as protuberances from the chloroplast
surface that elongate and extend. They are dynamic in the living
cell, continuously changing their shape, moving around, shrinking
back, and sometimes connecting with other chloroplasts. Their width
ranges from 350-850 nm, with lengths up to 15 microns. Plastid
protuberances may extend at a velocity of 10-100 nm/sec and
encircle another body, much like a finger curling around a sphere.735
Metamorphic manipulators are expected to present significant,
though probably not insurmountable, design challenges.
9.3.2 Nanoscale End-Effectors and Tool Tips
An end-effector is usually placed at the tip of a manipulator in
order to focus and redirect the application of forces. Examples of
simple force redirection include a screwdriver head or bolting socket,
a cutting blade, a perforative needle, and levers, pry bars or wedges.
End-effectors can also be used to achieve very fine motion control
at the tip. Perhaps the simplest task such an end-effector can perform is
the grasping or gripping of target objects in the environment. Figure
9.11 offers a small sampling of the many possible schematic concepts
for grasping end-effectors. Mechanical grippers as in (A) have been
fabricated with a jawspan of ~10 microns, tines ~2 microns thick,
and a ~5 KHz resonant frequency, and have been used to grasp
individual 2.7-micron polystyrene spheres, dried red blood cells, and
even various protozoa including a 7-micron diameter, 40-micron long
Euglena.
1267 Pneumatic grippers (B) have been built and operated
on a larger scale.1232 Figure 9.11(C) illustrates how high-frequency
acoustic point sources or ultrasonic resonance fields1627 can be used to
reversibly secure a small target object in a small space; electrodynamic
fields, electrophoretic forces,1628,1629 and optical tweezers1247,1630,1631
employ similar principles. The suction gripper (D) works on any
target immersed in a gas or liquid environment (Eqn. 9.22),1619,1620
whereas the magnetic gripper (E) only works on magnetic materials.
The electrostatic gripper (F) induces attractive Coulombic, image force,
or dipole charge effects, and is helped by the increased breakdown
field strength of very small gaps due to the Paschen effect. The van
der Waals gripper shown in Figure 9.11(G) uses variable nanoscale
surface roughness to regulate the van der Waals attractive force; fluid
surface tension or related forces may be modulated to reversibly
grip the target. Finally, any soft object in the environment can be
impaled by a narrow articulating spike, which then drops anchor
inside the object until the gripper is ready to withdraw (Fig. 9.11(H)).
Most of the end-effectors shown in Figure 9.11 involve direct
physical contact with the target object. Undesired or accidental surface
adhesivity (Section 9.2) of grippers and manipulators is a serious
design issue that must be addressed with respect to all possible
environments and target objects likely to be encountered by the
manipulation mechanism during the performance of its mission.
Complementary diamondoid surfaces in vacuo may adhere with a
contact tensile strength up to ~104 atm, representing ~1 nN of contact
force per nm2 of contact area and releasing ~5400 zJ/nm2 of energy
when the surfaces are joined.10 However, noncomplementary surfaces
in fluid environments can in theory be engineered to display almost
any interfacial adhesivity desired—including negative adhesivity or
repulsion (Section 9.2.3). Gripper/object adhesivity may vary
according to many factors that are subject to design control. For
example, all else equal, passivated diamond is 5-10 times more
“sticky” in the van der Waals regime than glass or plastic (Table
9.1). Manipulator mechanism surfaces should in general be highly
noncomplementary to container surfaces, biological surfaces,
nanorobot surfaces, and the surfaces of adjacent manipulators.
Contact electrification is minimized by using materials with a small
contact potential difference between the gripper and the target
object.1147
A wide variety of specialized complex nanomedical tool tips are
readily imagined, although an exhaustive listing or description is
beyond the scope of this book. Among the more interesting possible
functions (offered without regard to specific implementation) are
the following:
1. Injectors—pipettes, glue applicators, aerators/foamers, and
compound grasper/fluid injectors.
2. Adhesion Antennae—partially selective binding tips that are swept
through the environment, whereupon desired moieties or particles
adhere and can be removed from the environment or drawn
into the nanodevice (i.e., selective biochemical “dust mops”);
transmembrane in cyto sensory appendages.
3. Core Sampler—a rapidly-spinning hollow cylindrical cutting tool
that is driven into nearby tissue, whereupon suction is
applied, an irising diaphragm closes at the distal end which
separates the sample from the main tissue mass, and then the
Fig. 9.11. Grasping effectors (schematic).
292 Nanomedicine • Volume I
tool is withdrawn, extracting a full cylindrical core sample of
neatly excised tissue that is ready for further analysis or transport.
A similar tool may be required for ice burrowing (Section 10.5.2).
4. Noncovalent Biochemical Welders—rejoins noncovalently linked
biological structures that have become detached (Section 9.4.4.3);
closes gaps in lipid bilayer membranes after being breached by
the passage of an nanomechanical appendage or entire nanorobot
device (Section 9.4.5.6); reattaches vesicles and organelles to
microtubular tracks; reseals intercellular gap junctions.
5. Joining and Spooling Tools—bobbins, spinning and spooling
tools; fiber manipulators including stitching, stapling and
threading devices; rivet pin inserters.
6. Compression and Compaction Tools—extruders, compactors,
compression rollers, beam benders, crimpers, and compression
fitters including shrink fitters and press fitters.
7. Coarse Shearing Tools—microscale slitting, scissoring, piercing,
punching, trimming, shaving, notching, and perforating;
“eggbeater” tools for rapid pulping or liquefaction of semifluid
biological materials (Section 10.4.2.5.3).
8. Coarse Machining Tools—microscale drilling, lathing, sawing,
filing, planing, grinding and polishing.
9. Pattern Impression and Coating Tools—transfer molding, pantographic tracing; surface laminators, abstractors, decorators and
other surfacing tools.
10. Membrane Manipulation Tools—cell and organelle lipid
membrane bending, stretching, tearing, and joining; electric
field-induced lipid bilayer membrane demixers;1613 transmembrane channel inserters.
11. Molecular Tools and Jigs—tool tips designed to allow manipulation of individual molecules or molecular structures, perhaps
using enzyme-like functionalizations for grasping (e.g., binding
sites), cutting (e.g., pepsin, trypsin, collagenases, proteases,
lipases, nucleases), joining (e.g., ribozymes, ligases), splicing (e.g.,
spliceosomes), folding (e.g., molecular chaperones,466), copying
(e.g., DNA polymerase, reverse transcriptases), appending (e.g.,
transferases), and packing or pumping (e.g., hexagonal pRNA
packs coiled DNA into viral capsids1723). The engineering of
“wet” enzymes to accurately and reliably function when attached
to stiff manipulators will be challenging because any attachment
methods (multiple bonds) which will give the tip a high
positional accuracy might also interfere with enzyme function.
Enzymes generally require nanoscale movement to effect
catalysis—the more tightly the tip is held, the less likely the
enzyme will retain functionality.
Tool exchange ports and tool tip garages should lie within the
accessible work volume of the nanomanipulator system, to allow
convenient and watertight tool tip changeout, or else tool tips must
be transferrable internally within the manipulator (e.g., Section
9.3.1.4).
9.3.3 Sensors and Manipulator Control
In addition to end-effectors, it will often be convenient to position
various classes of sensors along the length of a manipulator, or at
the tip. Monitoring control cable lengths, pneumatic chamber
pressures, drive shaft rotations or strut lengths can allow a controller to
know the position of a manipulator tip to the accuracy of one control
increment, assuming no external forces and assuming regular
recalibrations by periodically returning the arm to a precisely known
“home” position. If low-stress stretch-inelastic metrological cables
are embedded in the manipulator structure, then physical displacements
of those cables in response to an applied load may be compared to
no-load force/distance profiles, revealing the external force vector.
Thus actual tip displacements are recorded directly by the metrological
cables, and force feedback is continuously available. End effectors
may include a wide variety of additional useful sensors, including
gripper force and adhesion sensors, chemotactic sensors, vibration
and acoustic sensors, electric or magnetic sensors, thermal or optical
sensors, and so forth (Chapter 4).
Techniques for precise nanomanipulator control had received
insufficient formal attention as of 1998. Pure open loop control
(e.g., dead reckoning with no sensory feedback) could be sufficient
in some molecular manufacturing operations. In this regard the inkjet
printer might be a more suitable conceptual model than the robot
arm, since a printer can build up considerable three-dimensional
complexity during repeated passes over the workpiece following a
simple linear chain of instructions in a raster pattern. Adding the
ability to sense a fiducial structure near the workpiece can provide
periodic checks on registration and reduce placement error, and
Drexler10 has described the use of sterically complementary probes
or alignment pegs to help guide end-effectors precisely to their targets.
However, force reflection and other sensory feedback are likely
to play important roles in nanomedical manipulator control. J.S.
Hall, cited in Drexler,10 points out that the ratios of the times and
energies consumed by a typical nanomechanical computation to
the times and energies consumed by a typical nanomanipulator
motion are enormously greater than the corresponding ratios for
microprocessor computation and macromechanical robotic arm
motion. In other words, computation is relatively cheap for
macroscale robotic manipulators while arm motion is relatively cheap
for nanoscale robotic manipulators. Thus the moment-by-moment
computer control of arm trajectories is the appropriate paradigm
for macroscale robots, but not for nanoscale robots. For nanoscale
robots, the appropriate manipulator control paradigm is often
trajectory trial-and-error, also known as sensor-based motion
control1623,1638 or “groping.”
Using trajectory trial-and-error, the nanomanipulator is moved
generally in the direction of a desired endpoint, then is stopped and
sensory feedback from the tip is obtained and examined for a match
with the target destination profile. Given only a partial match, the
arm is next moved in some direction and new sensory feedback is
sampled. If the profile match has improved, another increment of
motion is applied in the same direction; if the match has deteriorated,
another direction is tried. Much like a blind man groping for his
knife and fork by feeling around on the surface of a dinner table
until he finds the utensils, the nanomanipulator is directed by
trial-and-error progressively toward its goal, until the target is
unambiguously located.
Efficient search algorithms for detecting and avoiding local
maxima, identifying saddle points, rejecting outliers, and minimizing
search times are well-known to mathematicians. In some cases,
chemonavigational sensory readings may be taken using sensor pads
(Section 4.2.5) at the manipulator tip to determine proximity to
specific cellular processes or organelles. Unknown objects may be
examined by haptic (tactile) exploration1622 or by other means.
Outside the cell, extracellular matrix (ECM) elements may be
repeatedly chemotactically sampled to allow a nanomanipulator to feel
its way toward a particular structure or node. Deployment of multiple
nanomanipulators from a single device permits the simultaneous
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 293
coordinated manipulation of several objects in the environment. In
many cases, Brownian transport may suffice to bring a molecular
target to the nanorobot arm.
If a nanomanipulator can be moved in minimum increments of
∆L at mean velocity varm throughout a typical work volume Vwork,
then an efficient search algorithm can locate any target volume of
size ∆L3 that lies within Vwork in at most Ntrial ~ log2(Vwork/∆L3
)
trials, requiring a search time tsearch ~ Ntrial ∆t where the mean time
per nanomanipulator motion is ∆t  Vwork
1/3 / varm assuming a
reasonably smooth gradient in roughly cubical work volume. Taking
∆L = 1 nm, varm = 1 cm/sec, and Vwork = 0.1 micron3 for a cell-repair
type manipulator, then Ntrial ~ 27 trials and ∆t  46 microsec,
giving tsearch  1 millisec for the nanomanipulator arm to search for
(and find) its intracellular target using the trial-and-error paradigm.
This is consistent with the estimated time to search cell surfaces for
specific markers (Eqn. 8.5). For the telescoping nanomanipulator
to be used in molecular manufacturing as described by Drexler,10
and taking ∆L ~ 0.25 nm, varm = 1 cm/sec, and Vwork = 3 nm3
, then
Ntrial ~ 8 trials and ∆t  0.1 microsec, giving tsearch  1 microsec.
Other control paradigms might also be useful in molecular
manufacturing applications requiring high placement accuracy,
possibly including full closed-loop operation in special cases.
9.3.4 Manipulator Arrays
Arrays of micron- or submicron-scale manipulator elements can
be used to create 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional programmable motion
fields. In the simple 1-dimensional case, a single row of manipulators
alternately grasp, transfer, and release a load, passing the payload
down the line like a bucket brigade. In the 2-dimensional case, surfaces
may be coated with closely-packed manipulators, allowing rapid
and continuous transfers of multiple payload streams along multiple
surface vectors simultaneously. In biology, ciliated epithelium is
found in respiratory, excretory, digestive, circulatory, genital, and
nervous systems of various animal groups, to drive fluid flow.1617,1618
Examples in human physiology include the ciliated air passages of
the bronchi (Section 8.2.2) and the villiated surfaces of the small
intestine (Section 8.2.3). In these natural systems, payload transport
speeds are typically 10-100 microns/sec. For instance, experiments
with ciliated bullfrog gullet tissue show maximum transport efficiency
when moving a load of ~5 grams/cm2 at a speed of 27 microns/sec.526
Ciliary arrays used by protozoa for locomotion also display
time-synchronized wave patterns3558 (Section 9.4.2.5.1), which may
be analogous to the operation of submicron motion fields.
There are many possible applications of manipulator arrays in
nanomedicine. Ciliary arrays inside hollow nanofactory workspaces can
regulate throughput of physical materials for manufacturing (Chapter 19). Arrays can establish specified flows of environment fluids
such as blood plasma across sensors, or may be used in device locomotion (both crawling and swimming; Section 9.4) or in self-cleaning
activities. Medical nanosystems may incorporate complex
three-dimensional manipulator arrays to control the transport of
biocomponents in cell mills and organ mills (Chapter 21), to move
chyme across an artificial stomach lining (Chapter 26), or to move
fluids through artificial organs designed for chemical processing or filtration such as an artificial liver or kidney (Chapter 26). Ciliary transport systems may also support unique and highly sophisticated artificial whole-body nutrient transport systems such as the vasculoid-class
devices described in Chapter 30. These nanomechanical arrays can be
operated at transport speeds (1-100 cm/sec), flexure
frequencies (up to 1 MHz), and power levels (0.1-100 pW per array
element) characteristic of individual nanoscale manipulators (Section
9.3.1).
In 1998, the prototyping and testing of ciliary arrays in MEMS
work was an active research area. Ataka et al1274 fabricated and
operated a 1 cm2 array of 512 cantilever-type bimorph manipulators
(each one 500 microns long, 100 microns wide, and 6 microns thick)
and operated it at 10 Hz in a coordinated fashion to transport a 2.4
mg piece of silicon wafer at 27-500 micron/sec using ~100 micron
strokes and a 4 milliwatt input power to each actuator. Bohringer et
al1639 fabricated a prototype array of 1024 cilia called the “cilia chip”
that moves silicon chips at speeds up to 200 microns/sec with a
placement accuracy of ~3 microns and a lifting capacity of 250 N/
m2
. Individual ciliary pixel control allows movement of multiple
components on different trajectories, enabling the performance of
various assembly tasks. A larger manipulator chip (M-chip) consisting
of ~10,000 micro-actuator “resonators” (5-micron tall cilia) has also
been fabricated on a few cm2 of silicon substrate and tested at
~5 KHz.1645 A part dropped onto the array is propelled forward at
a constant speed of ~800 microns/sec.1646 Bohringer et al1643,1644
also created a theory of programmable force fields to model the
actions of a ciliary array; simulations have uncovered numerous
important operational design issues.1646 Analogously in experimental
biology, an array of kinesin motors fastened to a fixed surface transported microtubules hand-over-hand when ATP was added.2425,2426
Peter Will et al1640 developed a software toolkit to allow researchers
to program Intelligent Motion Surfaces1641,1642 to perform a variety of
simple functions including centering parts, spiraling a part to
center in a convergent field array, spiraling a part away from the
center in a divergent field array, rotating a part about the center
using four triangular fields, orienting a part in a programmable field
array, and sorting two parts using a hole as a trap for a part being
translated past it. Properly arrayed, such surfaces can form an
assembly pipeline in which parts may enter at one end and be
successively sorted, spaced (so parts flow through at a constant rate),
centered, aligned and, ultimately, inserted into other parts.
9.3.5 Materials Disassembly for Disposal
From time to time, medical nanorobots will find it necessary to
accept bulk materials of various sizes and types, and reduce those
materials to smaller and simpler forms in preparation for analysis,
transport, or disposal from the human body. For example,
nanorobots may be required to mechanically excise unwanted
tissue or mineral deposits from arterial walls. Disabled nanodevices
or their component parts found freely floating in tissues may also
require disposal. Both requirements are discussed below. A fuller
treatment of the biocompatibility of in vivo refuse, and routes of
final disposal thereof, is deferred to Chapters 15 and 16.
9.3.5.1 Morcellation and Mincing
Morcellation is the fragmentation of biological materials as they
are excised from the body; mincing is the progressive reduction in
size of tissue segments by mechanical means. Chunks of biological
material may be excised from the body using a tool such as the core
sampler described in Section 9.3.2. Cutting is required because many
connective tissues have strengths on the order of 10-100 atm but
the body is only pressurized to ~1 atm, so vacuum suction alone is
insufficient to pull coherent tissues apart.
In the simplest design, morcellated material is passed through
successive banks of fixed diamondoid cutting blades or rotating
diamondoid cutting disks positioned at various angles with progressively more closely-spaced blade edges. The target material is
minced into nanometer-sized bits. Each blade is geared for maximum
force application at relatively slow speed and turns in a tightly fitted
sleeve, providing an automatic self-cleaning action. More complex
294 Nanomedicine • Volume I
designs might include paddlewheeling-bucket or orthogonal-blade
arrays whose interiors are cleared by pistons after completion of the
mincing action on material compacted into the cutting chamber by
a larger piston. Table 9.3 shows that diamond and other potential
blade materials are far stronger than all forms of biological matter,
including dental enamel which is the hardest natural substance found
in the human body.
To quantify the mincing action, consider a blade of length Lblade,
cutting edge width Wedge, and compressive strength Tblade (N/m2
)
which applies a force Fblade to a biological sample of length Lsample
and thickness xsample and tearing strength Tsample. Assuming Lblade =
Lsample, then the minimum force required to cut the sample is Fmin
= Tsample Lblade Wedge  Fblade, the chopping energy per full blade
stroke is Estroke = Fblade xsample, and the continuous power requirement
of the blade (neglecting drag during the return stroke) is Pblade =
Estroke νblade where νblade is chopping frequency in Hz. Taking Lblade
= 1 micron, Wedge = 1 nm, xsample = 1 micron, Tsample = 108 N/m2
,
and νblade = 1 KHz, then Fmin = 100 nN, Estroke = 0.1 pJ, and Pblade
= 100 pW.
Consider next an ideal morcellation system which accepts a cubic
biological sample of volume Vsample = Lsample
3 and minces it by
progressive halving into final pieces of volume Vminced = Lminced
3 in
a minimum number of Ncut = log2 (Vsample / Vminced) cuts (analogous
to “oct-trees” in computer science3155). The energy required to make
the ith cut is Tsample Wedge [Vsample / 2(i-1)]
2/3 and after the ith cut
there are 2i intermediate pieces, hence the total energy Eminced
required to make all cuts down to the final pieces is:

E T W V (2 1)
(2 1) minced
sample edge sample
2/3 N /3
1/3
cut
= −
−
{Eqn. 9.54}
The minimum size of the final pieces depends on the character
of the sample material, the edge sharpness and speed of the blades,
and numerous other factors, but in most cases cannot be smaller
than 1-10 nm—natural biomolecules like hemoglobin, insulin, or
albumin are 5-10 nm in diameter (Fig. 3.15). A crude limit is Estroke
 Ebond, where Ebond = 180-1800 zJ for individual covalent bonds
(Section 3.5.1), which implies a minimum final piece size of Lmin ~
(Ebond/Tsample Wedge)
1/2 assuming Lblade = xsample = Lmin. Taking Ebond ~
1000 zJ, Tsample = 108 N/m2 and Wedge = 1 nm, then Lmin ~ 3.2 nm.
Eqn. 9.54 may now be applied to a specific morcellator configuration. Taking Vsample = 1 micron3
, Vminced = 1000 nm3 (Lminced
= 10 nm), Wedge = 1 nm, Tsample = 108 N/m2
, and νblade = 1 KHz,
then Ncut = 20 cuts, blade velocity vblade = νblade Vsample
1/3 = 1 mm/sec,
total mincing time tminced = Ncut / νblade = 20 millisec, volume mincing rate Vminced = Vsample / tminced = 50 micron3
/sec, total energy to
mince a single sample of volume Vsample is Eminced = 40 pJ, and
continuous power dissipation while the morcellator is in operation
is Pminced = Eminced / tminced = 2000 pW. Care must be taken to
minimize sample adhesion in blade surface design (Section 9.2.3).*
Once reduced to multi-nanometer-scale chunks, biological refuse
may be disposed of directly (Chapter 16) or may be further digested
using inorganic acids, lysosomal enzymes (Sections 8.5.3.8 and 10.4.2),
collagenases,359 or even direct molecular mechanodecomposition
(Section 9.3.5.3.5) which is the inverse of mechanosynthesis. A
discussion of the biocompatibility of minced tissue and methods of
final disposal is deferred to Chapters 15 and 16.
9.3.5.2 Disposability Engineering
Medical nanodevices should incorporate appropriate disposal
pathways as explicit design criteria. For instance, morcellator wear
during bulk materials processing will accumulate as a complicated
function of vblade, Tsample/Tblade, and numerous other factors, until
the blade fails. Proper morcellator design may include some ready
means for blade replacement, recycling, or elimination, or else the
entire subunit must be abandoned or discarded. Other internal
nanorobotic structures such as diamondoid binding sites, sensor
fittings, broken tool tips, or reconfigurable metamorphic drive elements
also may require recycling if interior refuse storage volume is limited or
if onboard fabrication materials are in short supply.
Additionally, disabled or malfunctioning whole nanodevices may
require disposal. Drexler [personal communication, 1995] has suggested
that nanodevices and their subassemblies could have frangible
mechanical links incorporated into their structure to enable easy
device disassembly for disposal. One can imagine a complex
nanorobot comprised of strong and closely fitted subassemblies which
are held in place by pins or tenons in the vacuum environment of the
functional nanodevice interior. If the pins are soluble in water, or
are readily unlocked by enzymatic agents, or are otherwise easily
removable, then large strong devices may be rapidly dismantled into
their constituent subassemblies with only modest effort, or
automatically upon infiltration of the external environment. Of
course, final disassembly or disposal of the subassemblies is still
required to achieve complete biodegradability. Construction using
special nonisotropic materials such as foamy diamond (containing
patterned vacuum holes) or biodegradable fiber windings that are
easily unraveled might also simplify this mode of disassembly (Chapter
11).
However, even setting aside biocompatibility issues, a major
difficulty with the above-described “Chinese Puzzle Box” approach
to disposability engineering is that no matter how clever the disposal
design, there will always be some occasions when the “puzzle box”
becomes jammed or sealed shut, or has been mechanically compromised, or is actively resisting normal disassembly procedures. Design
for disposal thus must include provision of capabilities to allow the
partial or complete dismantlement of disabled or uncooperative
devices.
Finally, there is the problem of nonbiological waste disposal. Such
wastes might include accidental releases into the in vivo environment
(external to the nanorobot) of raw feedstock materials, specialized
fuel elements, pressurized nanocontainers, or nanodevice components
such as tool tips, sensors, integument plates, or hard-material work
products in various stages of completion. All manner of
nanorobot-related detritus might plausibly be found freely floating
in the tissues or bloodstream, from the smallest diamondoid parts
up to and including detached whole manipulator arms, major
subassemblies following a major device breach, or debris resulting
from the execution of a voluntary autodestruct protocol (Chapter
12). While reliable and clean operation is an essential design objective
in nanomedical systems, it would be irresponsible to ignore the need
for an explicit nonbiological materials waste scavenging and disposal
capability (Chapter 16).
9.3.5.3 Diamondoid Decomposition
While most hard materials can be comminuted in approximately
the same manner as biological materials (Section 9.3.5.1), the
* M. Krummenacker notes that mechanical bond cutting might leave behind reactive fragments, possibly including radicals, that could dehydrogenate the diamond blade surface
via radical abstraction, leading to chemomechanical blade wear. A fluorine-passivated diamond blade might be more resistant to such wear, and hydrogen bonding with fluorine
increases protein-diamond friction, possibly giving better cutting.
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 295
onboard disassembly of diamondoid materials is clearly the greatest
challenge. The six general approaches proposed in this Section are
randomizing processes that destroy any atomic-level positional or
compositional information contained within the structure that is
being dismantled. Controlled information-preserving disassembly
processes are described in Chapter 19.
9.3.5.3.1 Grinding
Two substances of nearly equal hardness can scratch each other,
so a set of corrugated sacrificial diamond grinding elements can be
used to mechanically grind or saw the target mass into
nanometer-scale particulate waste. This process consumes a volume
of grinder mechanism which is approximately equal to the volume
of the target, hence is relatively energy inefficient because, in addition
to the power dissipated by grinding, the sacrificial grinders must
then be rebuilt which requires another expenditure of a similar
magnitude of energy for fabrication. At least twice the volume of
the original target in particulates is produced by this process.
Alternatively, two or more diamond targets may be rubbed against
each other destructively, most efficiently after the manner of a
macroscale ball mill. Note that diamond detritus may be ground,
though less efficiently, by sacrificial grinders comprised of materials
of lesser hardness or strength—for example, cubic boron nitride or
borazon, first synthesized in 1957, scratches diamond with ease.
Table 9.3. Mechanical Strength of Nanomedical Materials
Young’s Failure Young’s Failure
Modulus E Strength* Modulus E Strength*
Material References (N/m2
) (N/m2
) Material References (N/m2
) (N/m2
)
Human Body Materials: Other Inorganic Materials:
Saphenous vein 362 1.6-4.8 x 105 ~2 x 105 Water-ice (268-271 K) 1608-1609 3.6-4.5 x 109 0.05-1 x 107
Carotid artery 362 <5.9 x 105 ~2 x 105 Lead 460,1287 1.4-1.5 x 1010 1.4 x 107
Elastin 362,364 6 x 105 ~2 x 105 Tin 460 4.1-4.5 x 1010 --
Muscle tissue 362 -- 1-6 x 105 Concrete (unreinforced) 364 2.4 x 1010 0.3-3.6 x 107
Elastic tissue 521 -- 3 x 105 Concrete with PMMA 364 4.3 x 1010 1-16 x 107
Thoracic aorta 521 0.1-1.7 x106 0.1-1.7 x106 (+reinforcing fibers)
Erythrocyte membrane 362,1325,1415 ~0.001-1 x 106 1-20 x 106 Gold 460 7.4-8.0 x 1010 ~2.0 x 107
Axonemal microtubules 1449 ~5 x 106 ~1 x 106 Silver 460 7.1-7.8 x 1010 ~2.1 x 107
Actin microfilaments 362,3210 ~1010 ~6 x 106 Glass 1164,1280,1286 4.5-7.4 x 1010 3-120 x 107
Soft tissues (est.) -- ~0.01-10 x 107 Granite 364 -- 4 x 107
Cartilage 364,521 0.1-1.6 x 107 0.12-2.5 x 107
Abdominal skin 521 0.6-2.2 x 107 0.4-1.4 x 107 Copper 460,1164,1280,1288 1.1-1.3 x 1011 1.1-3.9 x 108
Cancellous bone 364,585 3-3.3 x 108 0.4-5.0 x 107 Flint 364 -- 1.2-1.9 x 108
Arterial plaque 1276 -- 0.1-1 x 108 Cast iron 460,585,1280,1288 0.8-3.0 x 1011 1-4 x 108
Tendon 362,364,521 1-9 x 108 0.1-2.1 x 108 (& wrought iron)
Collagen 362,364 1-2 x 109 0.2-1.4 x 108 Mild steel (std. 362,460,536,585,1164 1.7-2.1 x 1011 3.1-8.6 x108
Cornea 362 -- 1 x 108 structural steel) 1288
Intermediate filaments 364 4 x 109 2.5 x 108 Aluminum 362,364,460,1164,1288 6.9-9.0 x 1010 1.7-13 x 108
Keratin (& wool) 364,3209 4 x 109 2.5 x 108
Wet compact bone 362,364,585 0.5-2.7 x 1010 0.4-3.0 x 108 Platinum 460 1.5 x 1011 ~1 x 109
Dental enamel 364 7.5 x 1010 8 x 108 High carbon steel 460 1.9 x 1011 3.9 x 109
Apatite 364 1.1 x 1011 -- Case hardened steel 460 ~2.0 x 1011 2-7.8 x 109
Bone hydroxyapatite 364 1.4 x 1011 -- Kevlar 1283 -- 4 x 109
Bone fluoroapatite 362 1.7 x 1011 -- Tungsten 460,1281 3.4-3.5 x 1011 4 x 109
Other Organic Materials: Silicon 10,460,763,1281 1.1-1.8 x 1011 0.7-1.6 x 1010
Resilin 362 1.8 x 106 3 x 104 Boron 1281 4.4 x 1011 1.3 x 1010
Rubber 362,1280,1283 1.4-2.5 x 106 1 x 106 Fused quartz 460,1282 0.8-1.1 x 1011 1.4 x 1010
Abductin 362,364 1-4 x 106 -- Silicon nitride 763,1281 3.9 x 1011 1.4 x 1010
Peptidoglycan, wet*** 3149 1 x 107 3 x 106 Aluminum oxide 460,763,1281 5.3 x 1011 1.5-2.0 x 1010
Mature rat skin 521 4.4 x 107 1.34 x 107 Sapphire 536,1602,1605 4.0 x 1011 1.0-2.0 x 1010
Celluloid 1280 2.5 x 109 -- Graphite whiskers 10,763,1281 6.9 x1011 2.0 x1010
Cuticle (locust) 364 9 x 109 9.5 x 107 Tungsten carbide 460,536 6.5 x 1011 2.15 x 1010
Wood 362,364,585,1280 0.6-1.6 x 1010 0.02-2.2 x 108 Boron carbide 460 -- 2.2 x 1010
Chitin 364 7 x 1010 0.2-7 x 108 Silicon carbide 460,763,1281 7.0 x 1011 1.8-3.9 x 1010
Calcite shells 364 -- 0.5-1.0 x 108 Cubic boron nitride 460 -- 4.4 x 1010
Nautilus shell 364 4.4 x 1010 0.6-1.4 x 108 Cubic carbon nitride 1284,1285 ~1 x 1012 4.5-5.5 x 1010
Peptidoglycan, dry*** 3149 2 x 1010 3 x 108
Cellophane 364 -- 0.6-3.8 x 108 Graphite sheet (in plane) 1281,2280 6.9 x1011 2.0 x 1010
Cellulose fibers 364,3209 0.08-1.1 x 1011 2.0-9.2 x 108
Silk, Bombyx mori 364,3209 0.5-1.6 x 1010 3.5-7.5 x 108 Diamond 460,536,537,1281,1284 1.05 x 1012 0.5-1.0 x 1011
Silk, spider 362,364,1283 0.06-1.0 x 1010 3-15 x 108
Nylon 364 4.5 x109 7.5 x 108 Fullerenes** 10,1278,1279,1308 1.3-1.8 x 1012 1.3-1.5 x 1011
* Failure strength may differ significantly in tension, compression, bending, or torsion; value given is representative.
** Mechanical properties are a function of nanotube chirality.2277
*** Bacillus subtilis, bacterial cell wall.3149
296 Nanomedicine • Volume I
9.3.5.3.2 Cleavage
Jewellers and diamond cutters have known for centuries that
diamond has a “perfect cleavage” or “grain” in four directions, parallel
to its octahedral crystal faces. After cutting a notch or “kerf” along
the grain, a rather dull iron or steel edge is laid athwart the groove
and a sharp ~20 microsec blow is struck, forcing apart the groove
walls and causing the diamond sample to split along the cleavage
plane of structural weakness. Large diamond crystals may be progressively fractured down to near-nanometer scale by this technique.
A blade velocity of 500 m/sec should suffice for complete crack
penetration through the crystal;536 more energetic cleavage blows
give higher fracture velocities which may produce rougher surfaces
and even multiple fragmentation. Maximum crack propagation
velocity is 1580 m/sec in glass, 4500 m/sec in sapphire, and 7200
m/sec in diamond.536 A large impedance mismatch between the
gripper mechanism and the diamond crystal target optimizes pulse
reflection at the holding surfaces and maximizes fragmentation. A
gripper mechanism made of nylon (failure strength ~109 N/m2
; Table
9.3) has an acoustic impedance of 2.9 x 106 kg/m2
-sec,763 compared to
6.3 x 107 kg/m2
-sec for diamond,536 a huge 22:1 impedance mismatch.
A water bath also ensures acoustic reflection because of a large
impedance mismatch with diamond (~1.5 x 106 kg/m2
-sec for
water).
The weakest diamond cleavage plane with the lowest areal bond
density is the {111} crystal plane which has a cleavage energy of
10.6 J/m2
.
536 Thus a single cleavage of a 1 micron3 diamond cube
requires 10.6 pJ; a striker blade 1 micron long and 10 nm in width
must apply a pressure of ~109 N/m2 (~10,000 atm) along the contact
edge, well below the failure strength of the hardest steel (Table 9.3).
As a crude estimate of total cleavage decomposition energy, the
progressive fracture of a 1 micron3 diamond cube into one million
(10 nm)3 cubes implies a thousandfold increase in surface area and the
cleavage of 5.94 x 108 nm2 of diamond plane, requiring a minimum
energy expenditure of ~6300 pJ to perform the decomposition. The
cleavage technique is most applicable to brittle solids and may be
less useful in the fragmentation of composite diamondoid materials
(Chapter 11).
9.3.5.3.3 Sonication
Multiple acoustic pulses applied simultaneously to the surfaces
of a crystal may elevate the interior mechanical stress above the failure
strength of the material, causing it to fracture. Consider six diamond
hammers of facial area L2 and failure strength ~1 x 1011 N/m2 that
simultaneously impact each of the six faces of a cubic diamond target
of edge L, applying a non-self-fracturing peak pressure of 0.3 x 1011 N/
m2 at each face. The peak pressure rises to 1.8 x 1011 N/m2 at the center
of the cube where the plane waves converge, well exceeding the strength
of diamond and shattering the target cube throughout its interior. Sonic
pulverization is an analogous macroscale manufacturing process.
Single-walled fullerene nanotubes are cut by water-bath
ultrasonication at 55 KHz,1525 which is inferred to produce
microscopic domains of high temperature1523 following the collapse of cavitation bubbles, leading to localized sonochemistry
that opens a hole in the tube side. Vigorous sonication of
multi-walled fullerene nanotubes produces similar damage in a
CH2Cl2 bath.1590
9.3.5.3.4 Thermal Decomposition
Since carbon burns readily in oxygen, simple incineration in
a high-pressure oxygen-rich atmosphere seems an obvious
approach to diamond decomposition. A sapphire inner wall coating
provides a flameproof combustion chamber with a ~200,000 atm
failure strength (Table 9.3), and an externally insulated electrodynamic vacuum suspension (Section 6.3.4.4) prevents rapid thermal conduction and allows maintenance of high operating temperatures. The combustion temperature of diamond in air at 1 atm
is usually given as 870-1070 K,691 and higher oxygen pressures
should lower this range considerably. Evans1277 has studied the
noncombustive oxidation of diamond in pure oxygen atmospheres
as a function of temperature and pressure. Using data from Evans’
oxidation rate/pressure and Arrhenius oxidation/temperature plots,
the etch rate (in meters/sec) for the {111} diamond crystal face (which
oxidizes most readily) may be crudely approximated as:
{Eqn. 9.55}
{Eqn. 9.56}
where poxy is oxygen pressure (atm), T is diamond temperature
(K), k1 = 3.6 x 106 m/sec-atm, k2 = 2.68 x 104 K, k3 = 3 x 10-5
m/sec-atm, and the time required to completely oxidize a diamond
cube of edge L is tdecomp = L / vetch. For poxy = 100 atm, a 100 nm
diamond cube is consumed in 1 second at T ~ 750 K; a 1 nm
cube heated to T ~ 660 K decomposes to oxide in 1 second, or
in ~1 hour at 530 K. Although not modeled using high-pressure
data, Eqn. 9.55 hints that a pure oxygen atmosphere at poxy ~
1000 atm might support active combustion at an ignition temperature
as low as ~700 K. Oxygen ions at 100-1000 eV can machine the
diamond {100} face at a rate of ~0.01 (nm/sec) / (ion/sec-nm2
)
that saturates at a gas pressure >10-7 atm.2708
Extremely high temperatures are required to initiate and to
sustain pure graphitization—the transformation of hard diamond
into relatively soft (and more easily disposable) graphite by simple
heating. In vacuo, unstressed polished hydrogenated diamond
surfacesremain chemically and mechanically stable up to ~1275
K, at which temperature the passivating hydrogens are removed and
crystallographic surface reconstruction begins.1291 Drexler10 estimates
the characteristic thermal cleavage time for unstressed 556-zJ C-C bonds
in diamond as ~1085 sec at 300 K, ~1012 sec at 700 K, and ~104 sec at
1000 K. At 1300 K, a shear stress 0.18 nN/bond initiates plastic
flow,1292 but diamond remains chemically stable up to ~1800 K in an
inert atmosphere. Heating above 1800 K can result in extensive graphitization,1290 an autocatalytic process that spreads outward from nucleation centers. The experimental graphitization rate of the {111}
diamond crystal face at zero pressure is approximated by Evans1277 as:

v k e (m/sec) graphite 4
Ea/kT = − {Eqn. 9.57}
where the activation energy Ea = 1760 zJ/atom, k = 0.01381 zJ/K
(Boltzmann constant), T = temperature (K), and k4 = 5.4 x 1016 m/
sec. At 1800 K, graphitization is very slow, about 1 nm/day;
vgraphite ~ 1 nm/sec at T = 2150 K, ~1 micron/sec at T = 2440 K,
well above the 2070 K softening point and the 2310 K melting
point of sapphire.1602 Catalytic graphitization by Ni and Fe has
been observed at  1070 K.1596 But because of the high temperatures
involved, thermal decomposition of diamond by graphitization is
impractical in vivo.
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 297
9.3.5.3.5 Molecular Mechanodecomposition
Molecular mechanosynthesis can be used to construct nanoscale
objects, using either precise moiety-by-moiety placement or
mechanical part-by-part placement of individual nanoscale parts
(Chapters 2 and 19). Following the same process in reverse,
diamondoid objects may be decomposed atom by atom into their
constituent elemental components. This molecular
mechanodecomposition may proceed rapidly using many tools
working simultaneously, if no attempt is made to preserve or record
the encoded structural pattern information.
Many of the radical-based reaction mechanisms for diamond
mechanosynthesis described by Drexler10 may be reversible with
the application of mechanical energy, since at elevated temperatures
surface groups and radical vacancies apparently can migrate after
placement on growing diamond surfaces.1293 M. Krummenacker
[personal communication, 1997] suggests a speculative mechanochemical decomposition process in which a few surface hydrogen atoms
are first abstracted from an edge or corner of the diamond surface
to minimize steric congestion at the disassembly site. Then a
radical-based tool, possibly with an oxygen radical at the tip, bonds
to an exposed carbon atom and pulls it upward far enough to insert
another reactive moiety such as a nitrene (an analog to carbene)
into the gap, replacing another C-C lattice bond and allowing the
first carbon atom to be pulled further out of the matrix. This process is
repeated on an adjoining carbon atom, resulting in a two-carbon
unit with four bonds to the manipulator tool, which can then be
pulled the rest of the way out by mechanically disrupting the two
remaining C-C bonds to the diamond lattice without exceeding the
tensile strength of the tool tip. (A great deal of sensing and chemical
inference remains to be described in this scenario.) Krummenacker’s
process might also be used to record structural information, if
required (Chapter 19).
Evans1277 estimates that 1760 zJ/atom of energy are required to
break three C-C bonds and detach a single carbon atom from the
{111} diamond crystal surface into the gas phase. With 176 carbon
atoms/nm3
 in diamond, mechanodecomposition of bulk diamond
would require ~300 nJ/micron3
. Generously assuming only
~5 manipulator arm motions to remove each carbon atom and a
manipulator operating frequency of ~1 MHz, a single manipulator
can mechanically disassemble diamond at a volumetric rate of ~1000
nm3
/sec-manipulator. The volume of each mechanosynthetic manipulator described in Section 9.3.1.4 is ~105 nm3
, so ~1000 manipulators
disassembling in parallel occupy ~10% of a 1 micron3 work space
and can collectively mechanically decompose ~0.001 micron3
/sec
of diamond crystal while drawing a total of ~300 pW of continuous
power. Actual power usage may be far less, since in any reasonable
decomposition process some energy will be recovered when the
liberated carbon atom forms new bonds; high energies will only be
encountered in the transition state, as in any chemical reaction.
9.3.5.3.6 Chemical and Microbial Decomposition
Four issues are considered briefly here. First, can diamond or
sapphire be chemically solvated? Second, does any microbe likely
exist which is capable of attacking a diamond or sapphire surface?
Third, could such a microbe evolve naturally? Fourth, could such a
microbe be artificially engineered? (The author thanks R. Bradbury,
M. Krummenacker, R. Merkle, and J. Soreff for helpful discussions
and important contributions to this Section.)
I. Can diamond or sapphire be chemically solvated? Although carbon
is soluble in molten Fe (e.g., >1808 K at 1 atm),763 Co, Mn, Ni,
and Cr, there is no known room temperature solvent that dissolves
pure crystalline diamond. Intact diamond and fullerene surfaces are
extremely inert. For example, after facet-cutting, gem diamonds are
boiled in concentrated sulfuric acid for cleaning, leaving the gem
surface unaffected. The outer faces of natural hydrophobic diamond
may be terminated partly by hydrogen and partly by bridging oxygen,
with a significant proportion of carbonyl groups and a small number of
-OH and carboxyl (-COOH) groups as well.1596
Diamond is almost completely resistant to attack by
room-temperature ground-state molecular oxygen (see Eqn. 9.55),
although oxidative erosion by atomic oxygen has been shown at
rates of ~0.04 nm/min1599 and ozone or various radicals might also
be effective. Molecular fluorine only fluorinates the surface,1598
producing a “Teflon” coat (stable up to ~1120 K)1596 while not
disturbing the underlying C-C bonds because F makes only single
bonds; chlorine is also taken up by diamond surfaces.1600 Molten
sodium nitrate attacks diamond at 700 K.1597 At high temperature or pressure, carbon from diamond can migrate and form a metal
carbide phase in carbide-forming metals including W, Ta, Ti, and
Zr,1597 and metal oxides of Cu, Fe, Co, and Ni are reduced to the
metal (a redox reaction with the carbon escaping as oxide) upon
heating in vacuo.1596
Non-intact diamondoid surfaces may be more susceptible to
chemical attack. For instance, open-ended single-walled fullerene
nanotubes are consumed by a 3:1 mixture of sulfuric (98%) and
nitric (70%) acids at 343 K at a rate of ~130 nm/hour even in the
absence of sonication;1525 the same mixture intercalates and exfoliates
graphite.1524 A 4:1 mixture of sulfuric acid (98%) and hydrogen
peroxide (30%) at 343 K also etches the exposed ends of open
nanotubes at ~200 nm/hour, “much like the burning of a fuse.”1525
Etch rate may vary with the chiral indices (n, m) of the nanotubes.1525
COCl-derivatized single-walled carbon nanotubes will solvate in
organic solvents,2164 and high-strain sites such as the outer fold of a
kinked nanotube are subject to attack by nitric acid.2954
Sapphire is primarily corundum or α-Al2O3, the oxide ions
forming a hexagonally close-packed array and the Al ions distributed
symmetrically among the octahedral interstices.691 The solubility
of α-Al2O3 in ~neutral water at room temperature is given variously as
10-7 - 10-5 M (~60-6000 atoms/micron3
) at equilibrium,1602,1603
but solubility rises sharply below pH 4 and above pH 9 in an
almost U-shaped curve.1603 (Human blood pH normally ranges from
7.35-7.45).1604 Aluminum oxide is amphoteric, forming hydrated
Al+++ ions in acidic solutions (pH < 4) and Al(OH)4
- ions in alkaline
solutions (pH > 9).1603 Corundum dissolves slowly in boiling nitric
acid and in orthophosphoric acid to 570 K, and dissolves well in
potassium bisulfate at 670-870 K, or in borax or sodium
fluoaluminate (cryolite) at 1070-1270 K.1602
Air-exposed Al metal is protected by a thin1601 (~5 nm) adherent
oxide layer having a defect rock-salt structure691 easily compromised
by amalgamation or halogens, or by alkali hydroxides (e.g., NaOH)
with the generation of hydrogen in seconds at room temperature.
Complex-forming reagents such as Cu++ + Cl- also react with
oxide-coated aluminum metal in less than 1 minute.
II. Does any existing microbe possess the natural ability to attack a
diamond or sapphire surface?Extensive tests have not yet been performed,
and negatives cannot be proven, but the prospects are poor. Most
organisms develop the means for attacking materials in their environment because these materials are abundant and provide essential
molecules or elements that are needed for energy production or
important biochemical functions.
298 Nanomedicine • Volume I
For diamondophagy to evolve naturally, a microbe probably must
occupy a niche in which diamond is more abundant than competing
carbon sources. This is unlikely except many kilometers below the
natural oil/coal deposits in the Earth’s crust, though the possibility
cannot be definitely ruled out because deep-crustal-dwelling bacteria
and other archaic biota have been found in rocks at depths of at
least 2.7 kilometers, a field of study now known as
geomicrobiology.1592,3096 However, far more abundant nonpolymeric
carbon sources are usually available. Highly polymeric molecules
including long-chain hydrocarbons, cellulose, and starches tend to
be fairly resistant to enzymatic degradation—nature has found it
relatively difficult to devise an attack strategy for cellulose (e.g.,
wood) and chitin (e.g., crab and insect shells). With their crystalline
arrays, diamond and sapphire would seem to fall into this category
as well.
A microbe naturally evolved to attack sapphire would probably
be seeking to extract the aluminum (sapphirophagy), since oxygen
is plentiful elsewhere. However, Al is generally considered
toxic,752,3278-3281 and reports of microbes that feed on Al-rich minerals
are extremely infrequent and remain unconfirmed, though microbial
aluminum tolerance is well-known.3282,3283 Organisms use +1/+2/+3
metal ions (mostly Cu, Fe, Mn, and more rarely Mo and Co) in
enzymes to catalyze specific difficult reactions. Yet in seawater, Al is
~10-1000 times more abundant than Cu, ~50-500 times more
abundant than Fe, ~100-1000 times more abundant than Mn,
~500-3000 times more abundant than Mo, and ~10,000 times more
abundant than Co,763 suggesting that Nature has gone to great
lengths to avoid the use of aluminum in biological systems. Natural
sapphire also contains ~0.1% iron atoms (Fe++ and Fe+++), and natural
ruby has traces of chromium (Cr+++), biologically useful atoms more
conveniently available from alternative sources.
III. Could a microbe capable of attacking diamond or sapphire evolve
naturally? There are >1023 bacteria living inside Earth’s human
population alone. While most of these microbes (>99%) are harmless
or beneficial, up to ~1021 may be undesirable pathogens possibly
subject to attack by medical nanorobots. Could this large “natural
laboratory” population of bacteria evolve diamondophagy or
sapphirophagy as a defense against artificial nanomachines?
In the case of sapphire, most biological metal absorption is initiated
by secretion of acids strong enough to dissolve the metal-containing
material. Evolving an acid production capacity isn’t difficult because
most bacteria use H+ ion gradients as power sources. Common
bacteria normally create a mildly acidic environment. Typical
energy sources (e.g., glucose) are oxidized to increase the external
H+ ion concentration. The flow of the H+ ions back into the cell
through the ATPase enzyme generates ATP (as in mitochondria).
Blocking or minimizing ATP production and limiting external H+
diffusion could produce fairly high local H+ concentrations. Bacteria
such as Thiobacillus ferrodoxians, found in environments where better
energy sources are lacking, oxidize metal sulfides to generate
energy.3559,3560 These result in the generation of sulfuric acid and
environmental pH values of 2-3. Extremozymes that can work at a
pH below 1.0 have been isolated from the cell wall and underlying
cell membrane of some acidophilic bacteria;1591 some acids (e.g.,
HF) that dissolve oxides (e.g., SiO2) may be safely stored in purely
organic vessels (e.g., wax or plastic). As noted earlier, sapphire is
also attacked by strong alkali (but see below).
Natural evolution of a diamondophagic capability is even more
arduous. Acids such as HF, HCl and H2SO4 will not harm
either H-terminated diamondoid surfaces or cellular lipid membranes
which generally also have hydrogenated surfaces. While high H+
concentrations should remove oxygens from SiO2 or, with more
difficulty, from Al2O3, a more efficient attack strategy for
H-terminated diamondoid might be an extremely alkaline environment, although the most alkaliphilic bacteria (such as the
Natranobacterium gregoryi normally found in soda lakes and
high-carbonate soils)3561 only reach a pH of 10-11. High OHenvironments can destroy lipid bilayers, RNA, and standard proteases
and lipases.1591 Also, the biochemistries of acidophiles and
alkaliphiles are so tuned to their natural environments3562 that
the predominantly neutral pH found in the human body might
prove toxic for these microbes.
Most human-pathogenic bacteria likely to be attacked by medical
nanodevices are not extremophiles. Consequently, as R. Bradbury
observes, Nature’s design challenge is for non-extremophiles to evolve
systems of creating very high local H+ concentrations,3563 having
the energy resources available to drive this pathway and to minimize
ATP production which utilizes the H+ ions. Such evolution seems
unlikely. Only if medical nanodevices were constructed of an essential
material that is in short supply, such as iron, or could provide a
better energy source than the surrounding plasma or cytosol, could
bacteria be selected which have the potential of attacking
nanomachinery. Whether extremophiles might subsequently
repopulate the vacated microecological niches currently occupied
by natural pathogenic bacterial species is an open issue worthy of
future study.
IV. Could a microbe capable of attacking diamond or sapphire be
artificially engineered? Almost certainly the answer is yes. In the
simplest case using conventional biotechnology, a bacterium would
be designed to produce and secrete an appropriate acid or alkali,
creating a highly corrosive environment local to the target material
by binding to the surface and secreting the acid (or ions) into
sequestered adherent pockets.
J. Soreff suggests other approaches that may employ locally
far-from-equilibrium states which are harder to get (at least with fast
kinetics) in normal chemistry. One strategy is to engineer artificial
enzymelike structures that can bind to the target surface at one end
while catalyzing the local production of molecules in excited states (e.g.,
by crude analogy to luciferase in bioluminescence)3564 at the other end.
Enzymes like catalase and superoxide dismutase already handle locally
powerful oxidants, and in the presence of light and oxygen, C60 can
pass its superfluous excitation energy onto nearby O2 molecules, creating singlet oxygen. An enzyme might be designed to catalyze HOCl +
H2O2 →HCl + H2O + O2
* (singlet state oxygen)3565,3566, other singlets,3567,3568 triplets,3569-3572 quartets,3573 or other electronically-excited
oxidizers.3574 However, survival of such an enzyme over multiple cycles
is problematical. Another strategy is to design novel mechanochemical
tools into the bacterium. Proteins can convert ATP hydrolysis into mechanical motion. Such motion, perhaps combined with a “snap-action”
elastic energy storage mechanism to allow tool release speeds comparable to vibrational times, could be used to mechanically hammer an
oxidant into a diamond surface, thus reducing the chemical energy
required to be released at the point of action.
9.4 In Vivo Locomotion
One of the most important basic capabilities a medical nanorobot
may possess is the ability to move about inside the human body. At
its most simple, this movement may be purely statistical, with
nanodevices carried along with the natural ebb and flow of bodily
fluids. At the other extreme, nanorobot locomotion may be highly
deterministic, including powered drive mechanisms, mapping and
active navigation, and traverses of diverse histological territories
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 299
having markedly different mechanical and chemical characteristics.
The subject matter is huge and quite impossible to cover fully in a
single Chapter. As a result, the discussion here is merely a preliminary
survey of the most important issues and challenges of in vivo locomotion, suggesting promising new areas for future research.
Section 9.4.1 opens with an overview of fluid viscosity generally
and the rheology (flow characteristics) of nanorobot-rich biofluids
that might be associated with passive nanorobot locomotion.
Aspects and techniques of active swimming through the bloodstream,
or sanguinatation, are described in Section 9.4.2. This is followed
by discussions of cytoambulation (cell surface walking and anchoring)
in Section 9.4.3, histonatation (tissue diving including diapedesis,
ECM transit, and intercellular passage) in Section 9.4.4,
cytopenetration (entering individual cells) in Section 9.4.5, locomotion inside the cell (Section 9.4.6), and finally cytocarriage
(nanorobotic pilotage of natural motile cells) in Section 9.4.7. The
biocompatibility of motive mechanisms is discussed in Chapter 15.
9.4.1 Rheology of Nanorobot-Rich Biofluids
The study of biofluid flow, or biorheology, is useful in
nanomedicine because it is necessary to understand the flow characteristics of fluids through which nanorobots must navigate—whether
a nanorobot is actively swimming or is simply drifting with the
flow, or whether the nanorobot is traveling in an ordinary Newtonian
fluid such as water or in more complex viscoelastic biofluids such as
mucus or saliva. Additionally, the presence of large numbers of
nanorobots may dramatically alter bloodstream viscosity (depending
on nanorobot number density and shape), with important medical
consequences. The following discussion examines biofluid and
whole-blood viscosities (Sections 9.4.1.1 and 9.4.1.2), the radial
distribution of blood elements in blood vessels (Section 9.4.1.3),
viscosity and bloodstream velocity profiles of nanorobot-rich blood
(Sections 9.4.1.4 and 9.4.1.5), and hematocrit reduction in narrow
blood vessels (Section 9.4.1.6).
9.4.1.1 Biofluid Viscosity
Viscosity is a measure of the resistance of a fluid to shearing
when the fluid is in motion. Consider a plate of surface area A moving parallel to a fixed plane surface with constant velocity v, being
pushed laterally by a constant force F. A fluid of viscosity eta fills
the volume between the two surfaces, which are separated by a distance
d. The fluid layer nearest the moving plate also moves at velocity v
and the layer nearest the stationary plane remains stationary. In
between the two surfaces, the velocity increases linearly with distance,
establishing a constant gradient. This gradient is usually called the
shear rate (essentially a size-normalized velocity), or g = v/d (m/
sec-m, or sec-1). The absolute viscosity may then be
defined by:

F/A (N/m ) 2 = η γ ˙ {Eqn. 9.58}
where η has MKS units of N-sec/m2
, Pascal-sec, or, more simply,
kg/m-sec. In a Newtonian fluid, the shear stress F/A (N/m2
)
increases linearly with shear rate g, so that viscosity η is constant
over a wide range of shear rates. Many common fluids such as air,
water, saline and blood serum closely approximate the ideal
Newtonian fluid. The viscosity of solutions of molecules is related
to the diffusion coefficient; see Eqn. 3.5.
The viscosities of some common materials are given in Table
9.4. The viscosity of an ideal gas is independent of density and
independent of pressure between 0.01-10 atm; at higher pressures,
intermolecular interactions lead to higher viscosities.390 Theory
predicts that gas viscosity ~ T1/2 (e.g., rises with the square-root of
temperature T), but a somewhat larger temperature exponent is
obtained experimentally for real gases. In contrast, the viscosity of
liquids increases with rising pressure (typically by a factor of 2-3
after moving from 1 atm up to 1000 atm for organic liquids) and
decreases with rising temperature. In normal liquids the temperature
dependence is approximated by Andrade’s formula which gives:

η ~k e v
E / v kT {Eqn. 9.59}
where for example the activation energy for viscosity Ev ~ 25 zJ and
the constant kv ~ 2.1 x 10-6 kg/m-sec for pure water at 1 atm. Nonelectrolytes dissolved in water generally cause viscosity to rise, while
solvation of electrolytes may increase or decrease viscosity (the
effect is typically ~10% or less for a 1M solution). Large asymmetric
solute molecules increase viscosity more than an equal mass of small
spherical molecules. The threshold between solid and liquid is
generally taken as η ~ 1014 kg/m-sec.364
Most biofluids are viscoelastic and non-Newtonian, with apparent
viscosity ηa varying with shear rate and displaying other nonlinear
characteristics such as hysteresis, relaxation, and creep.362 Saliva
behaves more like an elastic body than like water. Because of its
high molecular weight, DNA solution is viscoelastic even at low
concentrations. Sex glands produce viscoelastic fluids, including
semen and uterine cervical mucus1392 (ηa varies ~20% during the
menstrual cycle).3575-3577 Human synovial fluid becomes increasingly
incompressible at higher pressures, with ηa ~ 10 kg/m-sec at g ~ 0.1
sec-1 (e.g., knee flexion during very slow walking) declining to ηa ~ 0.1
kg/m-sec at g ~ 10 sec-1 (very fast running), and to ηa ~ 0.001 kg/m-sec
at g ~ 10,000 sec-1 (experimental).362 Viscoelasticity is also an
important property of respiratory tract mucus, which typically shows
an ηa ~ 1 kg/m-sec at low shear rates near g ~ 0.1-1 sec-1, falling to
ηa ~ 0.01 kg/m-sec at high shear rates near g ~ 100-1000 sec-1.
362
Even ice is a viscoelastic material, with ηa ~ 1010–1013 kg/m-sec
(estimated as maximum shear stress divided by shear rate from data
in Sinha et al1609) for g ~ 10-3-10-7 sec-1 at 262 K; ice viscosity varies
with temperature (Table 9.4) as described by Andrade’s formula,
with Ev ~ 110 zJ as determined experimentally for pure ice,1609 and
taking kv ~ 6.3 x 10-4 kg/m-sec at high shear rate.
Cytoplasm is a complex viscoelastic material having a continuous
liquid phase (the cytosol) plus various suspended particles, granules,
and membranous structures. More precisely, the cytomatrix is a
mixed-phase body composed of a fibrillar network penetrated by a solution.1408 As a result, viscosity is different in the various phases. From
flow behavior, the viscosity of E. coli protoplasm was estimated as ~1000
kg/m-sec; from measured diffusion rates of sucrose, dextran, and
β-galactosidase, the apparent viscosity was 3-4 x 10-3 kg/m-sec.1407
Cytoplasm is inhomogeneous and anisotropic at many levels of
organization.
9.4.1.2 Viscosity of Whole Blood
Human blood is a suspension of cells, in plasma (an aqueous
solution of electrolytes and nonelectrolytes; Appendix B). The plasma
is ~90% water by weight, 7% plasma proteins, 1% inorganic materials,
and 1% other organic substances. The cellular component (Appendix
B) is essentially all erythrocytes, or red blood cells (RBCs; Figure 8.43),
with white cells of various categories comprising less than 1/600th
of the total volume of cells and platelets less than 1/800th.
Pure blood plasma is a Newtonian viscous fluid, with ηplasma =
1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec at 310 K. Blood plasma is the environment
300 Nanomedicine • Volume I
normally encountered by micron-sized bloodstream-traversing
nanorobots as they move between blood cells.
On the other hand, “whole” blood is the complete natural mixture
of blood plasma and blood cells. In blood vessels whose diameters
are much larger than the size of blood cells, or in the case of
mechanical systems with dimensions much larger than the characteristic sizes of blood cells, whole blood must be treated as an homogenous
non-Newtonian fluid. The bulk viscosity of whole blood decreases
with rising shear rate and increases with rising hematocrit (Hct),
the percentage of blood volume occupied by red cells. (The human
male hematocrit has a normal range of Hct = 40%-52%, average
Hct = 46%,743 which optimizes oxygen transport.1325) As an
example, for whole blood at a low shear rate of g ~ 0.1 sec-1, then ηa
~ 0.001 kg/m-sec at Hct = 0%, ~0.1 kg/m-sec at Hct = 45%, and
~1 kg/m-sec at Hct = 90%. At a high shear rate of g ~ 100 sec-1,
then ηa ~ 0.001 kg/m-sec at Hct = 0%, ~0.01 kg/m-sec at
Hct = 45%, and ~0.1 kg/m-sec at Hct = 90%.362 At still higher
shear rates g > 100 sec-1, whole blood behaves almost like a
Newtonian fluid with a nearly constant ηa (Fig. 9.12). Viscosity
also varies with disease state (if any) and slightly with temperature.
For whole blood at normal Hct and g = 0.1 sec-1, then ηa ~ 0.10 kg/
m-sec at 310 K and ~0.15 kg/m-sec at 283 K; for g = 100 sec-1,
then ηa ~ 0.010 kg/m-sec at 310 K and ~0.015 kg/m-sec at 283
K.362
For large blood vessels, the effect of hematocrit on viscosity for
Hct  45% has been modeled experimentally by Cokelet et al1318
as:

η ηa plasma
2.5 / (1 H = − ct)− {Eqn. 9.60}
with Hct expressed as a fraction. This formula, which also gives
good results for RBC-sized oil/water emulsions in the same volume
fraction range,1316 is only useful up to volume fraction of ~10% in
the case of rigid-particle suspensions, whose viscosity behaves
markedly differently from that of RBC suspensions (see below).
It has long been known1313 that human red blood cells can form
aggregates known as rouleaux, in which the discoid RBCs adhere
loosely in a “stack of coins” configuration at shear rates <100 sec-1.
1314
Formation of linear and branched chain aggregates (rouleaux)
depends on the presence of the cell-surface cross-linking proteins
fibrinogen and globulin in the plasma. The lower the shear rate
Table 9.4. Absolute Viscosity of Some Common Materials362,386,389,585,763,1081,1325,1328,1407,1458,1505,1609,3166,3306-3314,3611
Material (Gas, Liquid, Solid) Viscosity (kg/m-sec) Material (Gas, Liquid, Solid) Viscosity (kg/m-sec)
Water @ 0˚C (273 K) 1.787 x 10-3 Earth’s mantle (geological) ~1021
@ 20˚C (293 K) 1.002 x 10-3 Pitch (room temperature) ~1014
@ 37˚C (310 K) 0.6915 x 10-3 Glass @ 720-920 K (anneal) 2.5 x 1012
@ 50˚C (323 K) 0.5468 x 10-3 Glass @ ~1300 K (blowing) ~1 x 106
@ 100˚C (373 K) 0.2818 x 10-3 Glass @ 1500-1700 K (furnace) ~1 x 102
Ice @ -11˚C (262 K) ~1010-1013
@ -82˚C (191 K) ~1015 est. Glucose (295 K) 9.1 x 1012
@ -109˚C (164 K) ~1018 est. Glucose (310 K) 1.4 x 109
@ -129˚C (144 K) ~1021 est. Glucose (373 K) 2.5 x 101
Squid axoplasm 1-10 x 106 Golden syrup (285 K) 140,000 x 10-3
Pulmonary macrophage cells 0.12-0.27 x 106 Glycerin (273 K) 12,110 x 10-3
Chick fibroblast cells ~0.01 x 106 Corn syrup (294 K) ~5,000 x 10-3
Human feces, range (est.) ~10-2-105 Glycerin (303 K) 629 x 10-3
E. coli cytoplasm >1,000,000 x 10-3 Castor oil (310 K) 297 x 10-3
Mucus and sputum (310 K) 10-750,000 x 10-3 Machine oil, heavy (310 K) 130 x 10-3
Erythrocyte membrane (310 K) ~100,000 x 10-3 Machine oil, light (310 K) 35 x 10-3
Plasma membrane (~310 K) 10,000-100,000 x 10-3 Oleic acid (303 K) 25.6 x 10-3
T-cell cytoplasm (298 K) 27,300 x 10-3 Sulfuric acid, 100% (293 K) 25.4 x 10-3
Leukocyte, adhered cell (310 K) 66,800 x 10-3 Ethylene glycol (310 K) 10.7 x 10-3
Human fibroblast cytoplasm 5000-8000 x 10-3 Lead, liquid (623 K) 2.58 x 10-3
Leukocyte, free cell (310 K) 4500 x 10-3 Iron + 2.5% C, liquid (1673 K) 2.25 x 10-3
Amoeba cytoplasm 1000-30,000 x 10-3 Propanol (310 K) 1.5 x 10-3
Human chyme, normal (est.) 100-30,000 x 10-3 Mercury, liquid (310 K) 1.465 x 10-3
Human semen 9.4 x 10-3 Acetic acid (310 K) 1.01 x 10-3
Saliva (310 K) 4-10,000 x 10-3 Ethanol (310 K) 0.885 x 10-3
Synovial (knee) fluid (298 K) 1-10,000 x 10-3 Methanol (310 K) 0.472 x 10-3
Whole blood, low shear rate: Acetone (310 K) 0.285 x 10-3
Hct = 45% ~100 x 10-3 Diethyl ether (310 K) 0.202 x 10-3
Hct = 90% ~1000 x 10-3 Air, liquid (81 K) 0.172 x 10-3
Whole blood, high shear rate: Carbon dioxide, liquid (303 K) 0.053 x 10-3
Hct = 45% ~10 x 10-3 Neon, gas (310 K) 0.032 x 10-3
Hct = 90% ~100 x 10-3 Oxygen, gas (310 K) 0.021 x 10-3
RBC contents (Hb solution) 6-13 x 10-3 Air, gas (310 K) 0.01894 x 10-3
Human blood plasma (310 K) 1.1-1.2 x 10-3 Nitrogen, gas (310 K) 0.018 x 10-3
Serum/Interstitial fluid (310 K) 1.0-1.1 x 10-3 Carbon dioxide, gas (310 K) 0.0157 x 10-3
Bile fluid (probably liver) 0.84-2.3 x 10-3 Hydrogen, liquid (~20 K) 0.011 x 10-3
Human tears (310 K) 0.73-0.97 x 10-3 Hydrogen, gas (310 K) 0.0091 x 10-3
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 301
(e.g., the slower the blood velocity), the more prevalent (larger size
and number density) are the aggregates. As the shear rate goes to
zero, it is speculated that human blood becomes one big aggregate,
which then may behave as a viscoelastic or viscoplastic solid.362
As shear rate increases, the rouleaux tend to break up. Individual
red cells also deform slightly, elongating and lining up with the
streamlines. These two effects combine to reduce blood viscosity
with rising shear, as illustrated by Figure 9.12 which shows the relative
viscosity ηa / ηplasma for human blood at Hct = 45% as a function of
shear rate. Note that for rigid particles (including hardened red cells,
normal leukocytes, and nondeforming nanorobots), bulk viscosity
is essentially independent of shear rate.
Normal blood vessel wall (peripheral zone) shear rates in physiological
bloodflow range from 50-700 sec-1 in the larger arteries to 250-2000
sec-1 in the smallest arteries and capillaries, and 20-200 sec-1 in large
and small veins.386 At shear rates >100 sec-1 where RBC aggregation
ceases to be important, pure whole blood remains fluid even up
to 98% RBC concentration by volume (e.g., Hct = 98% volume
fraction).1319
9.4.1.3 Radial Distribution of Blood Elements
At low shear rates, red cells aggregate into rouleaux and migrate
inward, forming a network of aggregates in the core of the tube.
Individual rouleaux may incorporate 10-20 red cells, or more, creating
by far the largest cellular elements normally present in the blood.
At the highest shear rates, the rouleaux break up entirely into single
red cells, and the red cells then distribute themselves more uniformly
in the radial direction.
The radial distribution of white cells is also a function of flow
conditions.1325,1333-1336 At low shear rates, under conditions allowing
red cell aggregation, the white cells are displaced to the periphery of
the flow by the much larger red cell rouleaux. At the highest shear
rates, white cell concentration is highest along the tube axis, displacing
some red cells, since most white cells are larger than individual
red cells.
The radial distribution of the local platelet concentration during
blood flow in tubes has also been investigated.1337,1338 In plasma
containing only platelets, the platelet distribution is radially uniform.
However, in whole blood flow under all shear conditions, the platelet
concentration is highest near the vessel wall. In arterioles, the platelet
number density is about two times higher near the wall than in the
center of the vessel.1342 Platelets are much smaller than either red
cells or white cells, thus tend to be crowded out of the center whenever
red cells or white cells are present.
These experimental observations are consistent with the general
principle that during blood flow in a vessel, the largest particles, or
“flow units,” move toward the axial region, leaving the smallest
particles more concentrated at the periphery.1332 In most cases,
bloodborne medical nanorobots will be ~2 microns in diameter or
smaller. As such, they will normally constitute the smallest particles
in the bloodstream. More than any other blood element, free-floating
nanorobots should tend to migrate nearest the blood vessel walls,
although at high shear rates the radial diffusivity is significantly
increased due to local fluid motions generated by red cell rotations
(Section 3.2.2). Small molecules and complexes such as lipoproteins
are less subject to erythrocyte-induced diffusivity enhancement,
hence may migrate toward the walls.
9.4.1.4 Viscosity of Nanorobot-Rich Blood
The presence of large numbers of relatively rigid nanorobots
dramatically alters bloodstream viscosity. Figure 9.13 shows the
relative viscosity ηa / ηplasma for human blood at 298 K with shear
rate >100 sec-1 as a function of particle volume fraction, compared
to the relative viscosity of suspensions of latex rigid spheres, rigid
disks, emulsion droplets, and sickled erythrocytes (which are virtually
nondeformable), as determined experimentally.1312 Figure 9.13
reveals that a 50% suspension of micron-sized rigid nanorobots will
increase blood viscosity by a factor of ~350, seriously impeding flow
especially in the smaller vessels. However, a plasma suspension of
microspheres at a ~10% particle volume fraction has a relative viscosity
indistinguishable from Hct = 10% whole blood. This suggests a
conservative 10% volume-fraction limit for the maximum bloodstream concentration of medical nanorobots (e.g., a maximum
“nanocrit” or Nct = 10%), a limit that may also ensure free flow of
the fluid (see also Sections 9.4.1.5 and 9.4.2.6).
Fig. 9.12. Viscosity of human blood as a function of shear rate, at Hct
= 45% (relative apparent viscosity at 310 K, redrawn from Chien1314).
Fig. 9.13. Viscosity of nanorobot-rich human blood at high shear
rate (relative apparent viscosity at 298 K, shear rate > 100 sec-1;
redrawn from Goldsmith and Mason,1312Cokelet and Lichtman1402).
302 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Fig. 9.14. Establishment of parabolic velocity profile in Poiseuille
tube flow (redrawn from Goldsmith and Turitto386).
Relative viscosity also depends on particle size, though the effect
due to the presence of medical nanorobots is usually minor. As a
conservative upper limit in the smallest vessels:1315

η ηa plasma nano
tube
4 -
/ 1 D
d = − 

 










1
{Eqn. 9.61}
where Dnano (= 2 Rnano) is the maximum nanorobot diameter (radius)
and dtube (= 2 rtube) is the blood vessel diameter (radius). Taking
dtube = 8 microns (capillaries), then ηa / ηplasma = 1.0002 for Dnano =
1 micron, or 1.07 for Dnano = 4 microns (the largest bloodborne
nanorobot; see Sections 5.2.1 and 8.2.1.2). In larger blood vessels,
this effect is even smaller for micron-sized medical nanorobots.
Relative blood viscosity also depends on nanorobot shape. Chien’s
measurements1314 of effective viscosity as a function of particle shape
in dilute suspensions found that minimum viscosity is achieved by
hard spheres or by 1:1 hard cylinders. Thin disks or long cylinders
have higher viscosity. For example, 10:1 rods (10 times longer than
wide) produce a suspension with ~10 times higher viscosity than a
suspension containing an equal volume of spheres; for 100:1 rods,
viscosity increases ~2500-fold. The implication for nanodevice
design is that a large population of bloodborne medical nanorobots
will have the minimum impact on blood viscosity if each nanorobot
is closest to spherical in shape. Long rod or flat disk shapes will
greatly increase blood viscosity, in comparison to spheres, although
at the lowest nanodevice number densities the total impact on blood
viscosity may be negligible.
Chien’s results1314 also suggest that metamorphic nanorobots
capable of continuous surface deformations in response to flow
conditions (like RBCs) may further reduce their contribution to
blood viscosity by at least a factor of 2-6, depending on shear rate
(Fig. 9.12). Goldsmith and Turitto386 show that at shear rates over
200 sec-1, typical in physiological blood, the optimum shape for red
cells is ellipsoidal, positioned at an angle to the flow, with the surface
rotating in the direction of flow in a tank-tread-like motion. In
experiments with flowing emulsions, the deformation of a liquid
droplet results in its migration across the streamlines away from the
tube wall. Thus in physiological blood over the whole range of normal
hematocrits and typical flow rates, there is a plasma-rich (blood-cell-rare)
or “plasmatic” zone δplasma ~ 2-4 microns deep at the walls of vessels
whose diameters exceed 100 microns.362,1319
Such lateral migration is not observed with small rigid particles
of any shape at high concentrations and at low Reynolds numbers
(Section 9.4.2.1) NR  10-3 (e.g., arterioles and smaller vessels;
Table 8.2).1319 However, for vessels with NR  1 (e.g., arteries
and veins; Table 8.2), inertial effects do come into play and rigid
free-floating nanorobots will be pushed away from the wall to
produce a particle-free zone. The thickness of this “plasmatic”
zone δnano decreases sharply with increasing nanorobot concentration (Nct). For example, at Nct = 2%, δnano ~ 0.3 rtube; at Nct =
10%, δnano ~ 0.1 rtube; at Nct = 30%, δnano ~ 0.01 rtube.
1320
In terms of individual nanorobot motion, a rigid sphere initially
placed near the tube wall migrates inward, while a rigid sphere placed
near the tube axis migrates outward. Known as the “tubular pinch
effect,”1321 rigid spheres started in either position converge to an
intermediate equilibrium radius position (as measured from the tube
axis) of req ~ (0.6-0.7) rtube for Rnano/rtube << 1, or req ~ 0.5 rtube (farther
from the wall) for Rnano/rtube ~0.25.1320,1321 By analogy with Brownian
translational diffusion and Eqn. 3.1, a radial dispersion coefficient
Dr may be defined as ∆r = (2 τ Dr)
1/2 (meters), where ∆r is the RMS
radial displacement of a bloodborne object in an observation time
τ. The analogy is imperfect because these radial
motions are not random, but are due to multibody collisions
determined by the local velocity gradient, particle concentration,
and surface deformations of the objects. At any given concentration, displacements are greatest at radial distances between 0.5-0.8
rtube. For local shear rates of 5-20 sec-1 and volume concentrations
from 20%-70%, Dr = 1-20 x 10-12 m2
/sec both for red cells and for
rigid 2-micron diameter microspheres,386 and 3-86 x 10-11 m2
/sec
for platelets in whole blood,1398 as determined experimentally.1358
Thus the mean time for a nanorobot (Rnano = 1 micron) to migrate
a radial distance ∆r ~1 micron is τ ~25-500 millisec—about an
order of magnitude faster than simple Brownian diffusion (Section
3.2.1).
9.4.1.5 Bloodstream Velocity Profiles
Consider a Newtonian fluid of viscosity η flowing through a
cylindrical tube of length ltube and radius rtube with pressure differential
∆p between the ends. The average fluid velocity (vflow) for laminar
or Poiseuille flow* is given by Eqn. 9.26, but imposing a no-slip
condition at the vessel wall produces a radius-dependent parabolic
velocity profile:362

v (r) k (r r ) (m/sec) Pois p tube
2 2 = − {Eqn. 9.62}
where r is radial distance from the tube axis and kp = ∆p / 4 η ltube =
2 vflow / rtube2
. Maximum flow velocity vmax = 2 vflow, and occurs at
the centerline (r = 0).
Of course, as fluid enters a tube from a large reservoir, there is an
entrance region called the inlet length (linlet) which lies between the
entrance and a point downstream, where the parabolic profile is in the
process of being established asymptotically (Fig. 9.14). For NR  1,
linlet ~ 1.3 rtube, while for NR  30, linlet ~ 0.16 NR rtube, producing,
post-inlet, a <1% deviation from an ideal Poiseuille (parabolic)
profile.361,1331 Inlet conditions prevail throughout the entire length
of the aorta and most of the major arteries, but entrance effects are
minimal in the smaller vessels.
Now suppose that red blood cells are added to the plasma. Due
to the inward migration of red cells and other factors, the velocity
profile of whole blood is affected by flow rate and hematocrit,
* For well-developed turbulent flows, the velocity profile may be expressed as vturb = vmax (1 - (r / rtube))(1/m) away from the laminar sublayer near the wall, where m ~ 7 for
a wide range of Reynolds numbers.1390
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 303
particularly in vessels <500 microns in diameter, becoming blunted
(Fig. 9.15). The degree of blunting decreases with increasing flow
rate and increases with rising hematocrit. But the ability of RBCs to
deform under the influences of cell crowding and fluid stresses in
shear flow allows whole blood to continue to flow up to Hct ~ 98%.1319
It is theoretically possible that metamorphic nanorobots could
approach this level of performance, though this issue has not yet
been studied extensively.
What if rigid spherical nanorobots are added to the plasma
instead of red cells? At small Rnano and low Nct, the flow profile
remains parabolic. Onset of velocity profile blunting generally
occurs either when Nct  20% or when Rnano  0.05 rtube.
1322
Such blunted flow is sometimes called partial plug flow. Partial plug
flow was not observed experimentally when (Nct Rnano/rtube)  0.6%.
Thus, non-plug, purely Poiseuille flow can probably be maintained for
2-micron diameter bloodborne nanorobots even while passing
through the smallest dtube = 4 micron human capillary by holding Nct
 1.2%.
Figure 9.16 shows the experimentally-determined effects of Nct,
Rnano/rtube, and fluid flow rate on the velocity profile of suspensions of
rigid spheres and disks.1317,1322 As Nct and Rnano/rtube continue to rise,
complete plug flow eventually ensues (Fig. 9.16(B)), wherein the entire
mass of fluid moves stiffly at constant velocity, like toothpaste squeezed
from a tube. Plug flow requires much higher pumping power (and
pumping pressure) than laminar flow. Complete plug flow was
observed at Nct = 38% and Rnano = 0.112 rtube, that is, when (Nct
Rnano / rtube)  3.8%. If complete plug flow can be avoided by holding
Rnano/rtube < 0.38 at our assumed maximum Nct ~ 10% (Section
9.4.2.6), then for the smallest dtube = 4 micron human capillary, Rnano <
0.76 microns, allowing up to Dnano = 1.5 micron diameter for
bloodborne nanodevices at the maximum nanocrit.
Further analysis that might consider the effects (on bloodborne
nanorobot velocity profiles) of vessel geometry (including bifurcations,
nozzling, and curved paths), vessel wall elasticity (including collapsible
tubes), pulsatile flow, and adding nanorobots of various mixtures of
sizes and shapes to whole blood rather than plasma, would be useful
but is beyond the scope of this book.
9.4.1.6 Hematocrit Reduction in Narrow Vessels
Fahraeus1313 found that when blood of a constant hematocrit Hct
is allowed to flow from a large feed reservoir into a small tube, hematocrit in the tube (Hcttube) decreases as the tube diameter
decreases; Fahraeus and Lindqvist1323 found a decrease in apparent
viscosity when tube diameter is reduced to below 300 microns (Fig.
9.17). Barbee and Cokelet1324 crudely approximated the experimental data using the following (slightly modified) empirical formula:
Hcttube ~ (a ln(dtube) + b) Hct (%) {Eqn. 9.63}
where a = 0.196, b = -0.117, and dtube is expressed in microns.
Given a normal human male hematocrit of Hct = 46%, in smaller
vessels this falls to Hcttube = 36% at dtube = 100 microns, 25% at
30 microns, and 13% at 8 microns. Surveying the literature,
Gaehtgens1329 concludes that minimum hematocrit Hcttube generally
occurs at dtube ~ 15-20 microns, which Cokelet1327 suggests marks
the transition from multi-file flow to single-file flow among the
red cells. Gaehtgens1330 also showed that the relative viscosity of
human RBC suspensions reaches a minimum at about 5-7 microns.
Hematocrit decreases in small blood vessels for several reasons. First,
a cell-free layer approximately equal to RBC radius exists near the wall,
so the smaller the vessel, the larger the fraction of volume occupied by
this layer, hence the lower the hematocrit.362 Second, a vessel side branch
that draws mainly from the cell-free layer produces a lower hematocrit
in that side branch (an effect called plasma skimming.1326) Third, red
cells are elongated and oriented along the direction of shear flow, making it less likely that they will enter a side branch aligned perpendicular
to the direction of flow (an effect at dtube  29
microns,1327 sometimes called screening or steric hindrance.1328) All
three factors should be less important for near-spherical rigid nanorobots
that are smaller than RBCs, hence any reduction in nanocrit during
passage through narrow blood vessels should be quite modest.
The velocity of a cell or nanorobot located on the axis of a small
vessel is greater than the mean velocity of the suspending fluid,1328 but
is always slightly less than the fluid in the immediate vicinity on the
axis (Section 9.4.1.5). The simplest model is the stacked-coins model
discussed by Whitmore,1315 wherein the nanorobot velocity vnano is
given by:

v
v 1 D
d
nano
flow
nano
tube
2 -
= + 

 










2
1
{Eqn. 9.64}
Taking dtube = 8 microns and vflow = 1 mm/sec for a typical capillary
(Table 8.2), a nanorobot with diameter Dnano = 2 microns has vnano =
1.88 mm/sec, which is faster than vflow but is slower than vmax = 2 mm/
sec.
9.4.2 Sanguinatation
Medical nanorobots will often be called upon to travel from place
to place within the human body by actively swimming through the
bloodstream, a process called sanguinatation. This Section describes
the general nature of the process in terms of the Reynolds number
(Section 9.4.2.1), rotations and collisions with vessel walls and cellular
blood components likely to be experienced by free-floating or powered
nanorobots (Section 9.4.2.2), nanorobot hydrodynamics (Section
9.4.2.3), general force and power requirements for submersive swimming (Section 9.4.2.4), various specific natation mechanisms (Section
9.4.2.5), and some additional considerations regarding sanguinatation
(Section 9.4.2.6).
Fig. 9.15. Blunted velocity profile in whole blood flow (modified
from Goldsmith and Turitto386).
304 Nanomedicine • Volume I
power to a swimming nanorobot with radius Rnano = 1 micron and
velocity vnano = 1 cm/sec is suddenly stopped, then the nanorobot will
“coast” to a halt in a time tcoast = ρ Rnano2 / 15 η = 0.1 microsec and in
a distance xcoast ~ vnano tcoast = 1 nm.1395 If the nanorobot is rotating
at a frequency νnano = 100 Hz when its rotational power source is
suddenly turned off, νnano decays exponentially to zero in a time
tcoast ~ 0.1 microsec and stops after turning θcoast = 2 π νnano ρ
Rnano2
 / 15 η ~ 40 microradians.
The ratio of inertial to viscous forces is called the Reynolds number
NR, or:

N F
F ~ v L R inertial
viscous
= ρ
η
{Eqn. 9.65}
9.4.2.1 Reynolds Number
Consider an object of characteristic dimension L moving at
velocity v through a fluid of density ρ and viscosity η. The object’s
movement is resisted by two forces—inertia and viscous drag. The
inertial force on the object is of order Finertial ~ ρ v2
 L2
; the viscous
drag force is of order Fviscous ~ η v L. Thus a slow human underwater
swimmer with L ~ 1 meter, v ~ 0.1 m/sec, ρ ~ 1000 kg/m3
, and
η ~ 10-3 kg/m-sec must apply Finertial ~ 10 N plus a minor additional
Fviscous ~ 10-4 N of motive force in order to keep moving forward.
Clearly, the human swimmer lives in a world of predominantly
inertial forces.
A bacterial swimmer faces entirely different challenges.389,1386,1387
A bacterium of size L ~ 1 micron and velocity v ~ 10 micron/sec must
apply Finertial ~ 10-4 fN (femtonewtons; 1 fN = 10-15 N) but also a
much larger Fviscous ~ 10 fN of motive force in order to keep moving
forward. The ratio of the two forces is still 105
:1, but the roles have
reversed. The bacterium (or any micron-scale medical nanorobot) lives
in a world dominated by viscosity, where, as an example, the phenomenon of “coasting” essentially ceases to exist. For instance, if motive
Fig. 9.16. Dimensionless velocity profiles in flowing aqueous
nanorobot suspensions (rigid spheres and discs in rigid tubes; modified
from Karnis, Goldsmith, and Mason1322). A) Effect of concentration
(Nct = % nanocrit). B) Effect of particle size (Rnano/rtube). C) Effect
of fluid flow rate (VHP). D) Effect of nanorobot shape.
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 305
which is a dimensionless number. In the examples given above, NR
= 105 for the human swimmer and NR = 10-5 for the bacterium.
Purcell389 notes that for a man to be swimming at the same Reynolds
number as his own sperm, he would have to be placed in a swimming
pool full of molasses and then be forbidden to move any part of his
body faster than 1 cm/min, roughly the speed of the minute-hand
of a large wall clock.
The Reynolds number has already been introduced in connection
with laminar tube flow (Section 9.2.5), and elsewhere it has been
noted that NR = 100-6100 in the arteries, 200-900 in the veins,
0.0004-0.003 in the blood capillaries (Table 8.2), and ~10-6–1 for
lymph vessels (Table 8.5). However, these figures are relevant only
when considering flow phenomenon on a scale large enough such
that the cellular graininess of human blood may be ignored. In the case
of microscopic motile cells and medical nanorobots, this assumption is
not valid.
On the contrary, nanorobotic sanguinatators will find themselves
negotiating a viscous Newtonian-fluid plasmatic environment,
punctuated by numerous closely-spaced free-floating cellular
obstacles. Powered sanguinatation thus may involve traversing
opportunistic clear volumes of blood plasma between red cells, then
altering course to take advantage of the next available open space
further along, following a zig-zag path generally in the desired
direction. While the sizes and shapes of these clear volumes are
strongly time- and position-dependent, their characteristic size is
xclear ~ (MCV (100%-Hct) / Hct)1/3. Taking the Mean Cell Volume
MCV = 94 micron3 for red cells (Section 8.2.1.2), then xclear ~ 5
microns in the arteries where Hct ~ 46% and xclear ~ 10 microns in
the capillaries where Hct = Hcttube ~ 10% (Section 9.4.1.6). If paths
taken through clear volumes at a mean velocity vnano average an
angle θpath relative to the desired direction of travel, then the net
forward velocity in the desired direction is vnet = vnano cos(θpath).
Taking vnano ~ 1 cm/sec giving NR = 10-2, then vnet ~ 0.5 cm/sec
through heavy traffic in the vessel lumen assuming θpath ~ 60˚.
Brownian displacements of RBCs are negligible by comparison—
vbrownian ~ ∆X / τ ~ 0.1 micron/sec for ∆X ~ 1 micron (Eqn. 3.1)—
while shear velocities in small arteries are typically ~1 mm/sec (Section
9.4.2.2). For powered trajectories exclusively confined to the cell-free
“plasmatic” zone near the blood vessel wall (the vascular “express
lane” for the fastest-moving nanorobot traffic; Section 9.4.2.6), xclear
is largely independent of Hct, θpath ~ 0˚, and vnet ~ vnano.
9.4.2.2 Rotations and Collisions in sanguo
From Eqn. 9.62 describing the axial fluid velocity vPois as a function
of radial distance r in laminar tube flow, the velocity gradient, or shear
rate g, is seen to increase linearly with r, as:

g= 

 

 = 





∆
η
p
2 l r 4 v
r r (sec )
tube
flow
tube
2
-1 {Eqn. 9.66}
When a suspending liquid is subjected to laminar flow, the fluid
stresses on the surface of suspended rigid bodies cause those bodies
to rotate as they travel down the tube.1319 Rigid free-floating spherical
nanorobots will rotate with uniform angular velocity, or, more
specifically, with a rotational frequency of:

ν
π
∆
π η π nano tube
flow
tube 4 2
p
8 l r v
 r = = r (Hz) 

 

 = 





g
{Eqn. 9.67}
For example, a rigid free-floating spherical nanorobot traveling
in an artery with rtube = 500 micron and vflow = 100 mm/sec (Table
8.2) rotates at νnano ~ 63 Hz at r = 495 microns (very near the vessel
wall), which is much faster than the random ~0.1 Hz Brownian
rotation typical for micron-scale nanorobots (Section 3.2.1).
Non-spherical rigid particles1343 and red cells1344 display variable
angular velocity but spend more time in each orbit aligned with the
direction of flow. Platelets can be seen tumbling in arterioles, especially
near the vessel wall,1340 but they tend to align with the flow, a tendency
which is strongest nearest the wall.1341
Gyroscopic effects are present in every rotating body, with pitch,
roll, yaw, and turning producing torques which cause precessions,
giving periodic increases in bearing pressures and stresses. Fortunately,
these stresses remain modest in most nanomechanical designs. For
example, consider a rapidly spinning component inside the tumbling
spherical nanorobot described in the previous paragraph. This
internal component is a diamondoid disk of radius rdisk, thickness
hdisk, and density ρdisk, spinning at an angular velocity ωdisk around
an axis oriented in the plane of the nanorobot tumble (tumbling is
at frequency νnano), and supported by two coaxial bearings located a
distance xbearing apart. The gyroscopic reaction force on the bearings
is given by:

F
rh
x bearing
2
disk
4
disk disk dis k nano
bearing
= π ρω ν {Eqn. 9.68}
Fig. 9.17. Reduction of hematocrit (Hct) and blood viscosity in
narrow blood vessels1313,1324,1325 (redrawn from Chien1325).
306 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Taking rdisk = 100 nm, hdisk = 20 nm, ρdisk = 3510 kg/m3
, ωdisk ~
ωmax ~ 1010 rad/sec (Eqn. 4.17), νnano = 63 Hz, and xbearing ~ hdisk, then
Fbearing ~ 2 pN.
In general, if two micron-scale objects are translating at the same
mean speed, more energy is dissipated by the one that produces the
larger amount of vorticity—that is, an axisymmetric object that rotates
as it swims is less efficient than the nonrotating swimmer.1389 The
tangential force required to neutralize the hydrodynamic torque
acting on a rigid sphere of radius Rnano and tumble frequency νnano
is torque divided by radius, or:1396

Ftumble 16 R 2
nano
2 = π η νnano {Eqn. 9.69}
For Rnano = 1 micron, νnano = 63 Hz, and η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec for
plasma at 310 K, then Ftumble = 11 pN. Application of such small forces
may be controlled using measurements of absolute orientation taken
from an onboard nanogyroscope (Section 4.3.4.1). Given that Fbearing
and Ftumbleare of similar magnitude, direct anti-tumble gyrostabilization
and gyroscopic rotational locomotion (gyrorotation) may be possible in
some nanorobot applications.
The velocity gradient often brings suspended particles into close
proximity. Kinetic theories of flowing suspensions have been
developed from experiments on model systems involving two-body
collisions between rigid and deformable spheres1345 and between rigid
cylinders.1343 Goldsmith and Mason1312 estimate that the per-object
collision frequency K for equal-sized rigid spheres of volume concentration c flowing at velocity v at a radial distance r from the center of a
tube of radius rtube is:

K 32 v r c
 r (collisions/sec)
tube
2 = π
{Eqn. 9.70}
However, no complete theory yet exists to describe all the
interactions of multiple classes of rigid bodies and deformable cells in
blood vessels.
As a crude approximation, consider the laminar flow of a fluid
suspension of two types of spherical objects (i = 1, 2) of radius Ri,
density ρi (kg/m3
), number density ni (m-3), and volumetric
concentration ci = (4 π / 3) ni Ri
3 expressed as a fraction. Each
object occupies a cubic fluid volume of dimension Li ~ ni
-1/3 = (4 π Ri
/ 3 ci)
1/3, and in laminar flow, two radially-adjacent boxes move past
each other (a “collision”) at a mean relative velocity of vij ~ g (Ri + Rj)
when Ri, Rj << rtube, and interact for a time tij ~ Li / vij (j = 1, 2). From
the viewpoint of object i, the probability that after Ncoll ij collisions at
least one object j has been encountered is pj = 1– (1 – cj)Ncoll ij. Taking
pj ~ 0.9 (the final result is relatively insensitive to the exact threshold
selected), and multiplying by 2 because there is a concentric layer
on either side of object i, then the mean collision rate experienced
by each object i with an object j also present in the suspension is
Kij ~ 2 (Ncoll ij tij)
-1, which, at a radial distance r in the tube, may be
written as:

K ~ 2 48 v c
r
R R
R r log (1 c ) ij
flow i
1/3
tube
2
i j
i 10 j
1
π


 

 





 +




 − −
1 3/
(collisions/sec)
{Eqn. 9.71}
and the mean free path (I
-
ij) between an object i and an object j in
the suspension (neglecting all velocity profile and margination
effects) is given approximately by:

l ~ 6 R c R c ij
1/3
i i
-1/3
j j
 π -1/3

 

 ( ) + {Eqn. 9.72}
For example, in a suspension consisting of Ri = 1 micron
nanorobots with volume concentration ci = 0.10 (Nct = 10%), and
Rj ~ 1.5 micron platelets with cj = 0.0035 (mean physiological
plateletocrit), flowing through a small artery with rtube = 500
microns at mean velocity vflow = 100 mm/sec, and at a radial distance r
= 495 microns (near the tube wall), then for nanorobot/platelet
interactions, Kij ~ 2 collisions/sec, mean collision velocity
vij ~ 2 mm/sec, and
Iij = 9.7 microns. For nanorobot/nanorobot
interactions, Kij ~ 40 collisions/sec (cf. K = 200 collisions/sec using
Eqn. 9.70), vij ~ 1.6 mm/sec, and
Iij = 3.5 microns. These figures are
crude estimates at best, since they ignore many possible complicating
factors such as aggregation and margination, collision inelasticities
and n-body collisions (n > 2), nonspherical object shapes, the presence
or absence of specific macromolecules, receptor interactions, pulsatile
flow, ionic strength of the medium, and cell surface electrostatics.1325,3545
Free-floating nanorobots that collide with blood vessel walls
produce negligible shear forces, given the no-slip condition at the
wall. Powered nanorobots of radius Rnano that impact a vessel wall
at velocity vnano may apply a maximum shear stress of pshear ~ ρnano
vnano2
; taking ρnano ~ 1000 kg/m3 and vnano ~ 1 cm/sec, then pshear ~
0.1 N/m2
. By comparison, the time-averaged shear stress for blood
circulation in normal vessels362,1346,1347,1352 is 1-2 N/m2 (range
0.5-5.6 N/m2
)
386, reaching up to 10-40 N/m2 when small arteries
and arterioles are partially occluded as by atherosclerosis or vascular
spasm.1348,1349 This may also be compared to the threshold limit
for shear stress-induced platelet aggregation of 6-9 N/m2
,
1346,1349-1351
the shearing stress of 5-100 N/m2 acting at the interface between a
leukocyte and an endothelium when the leukocyte is adhering to or
rolling on the endothelium of a venule,366 and the critical shear
stress of 42 N/m2 known to initiate major changes in the endothelial
cells in the arteries.365
9.4.2.3 Disturbed Flows, Hydrodynamic Interactions,
and Entropic Packing
Two kinds of fluid flow have already been described—laminar
or Poiseuille streamline flow, and turbulent or random flow. However,
in branching or nonuniform-diameter blood vessels, nanorobots may
also be required to negotiate an additional flow regime that is not
observed in straight tubes of uniform diameter. This third
regime, called “disturbed flow,” involves secondary fluid motions in
directions away from that of the primary flow, often with separation of
the streamlines from the vessel walls to form a vortex or a recirculation
zone between the forward flowing mainstream and the wall.1358
Disturbed flow is most common in the larger blood vessels.
Studies have been conducted to observe the flow patterns in various
vessels of simple and complex geometries, using flow visualization
and cinemicrographic techniques.1358-1366 In one extensive series of
experiments,1359 tracer polystyrene microspheres were photographed
at various flow rates as they traveled through glass tube models or
through chemically-transparentized natural blood vessels. The
developed movie films were then projected on a drafting table and
analyzed frame by frame. Figure 9.18 illustrates some results for
progressively higher-angle blood vessel bifurcations. The
cross-streamline and vortex patterns are quasi-stable; in pulsatile
flow, vortices vary periodically in size and intensity, with the axial
location of the vortex center and reattachment point oscillating in
phase with the upstream fluid velocity between maximum and
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 307
minimum positions about a mean.1361 A model study using red
cells1361 found that over time periods long in comparison with the
orbital period, single cells and small aggregates <20 microns in
diameter migrate outward across the closed streamlines and exit the
vortex after describing a series of spiral orbits of continually
increasing diameter until rejoining the mainstream. Erythrocyte
rouleaux >30 microns in size remain trapped within the vortex,
either assuming equilibrium orbits or staying at the center. The vortex
also provides favorable conditions for the spontaneous aggregation
of normal human platelets through shear-induced collisions of
particles circulating in their orbits.1362 An intimate knowledge of
disturbed flow patterns in all human blood vessels will be essential
in any nanomedical mission design requiring sanguinatating
nanorobots, but further detailed discussion is beyond the scope of
this book.
A variety of early studies attempted to model the hydrodynamics of
micron-scale swimmers, including descriptions of the hydrodynamics
of an individual swimming cell,1367,1368,3583 the hydrodynamic interaction of two magnetotactic bacteria,1369 and the interaction of two
parallel swimming cells.1370 Wall effects are well-known.1393,3584,3585
For instance, the velocity of a flagellar swimmer decreases as it moves
closer to a solid boundary; the boundary effect is strong at low NR,
with speed reduced 5% even at 10 object radii from the wall.1391
Flagellates swim in curved paths near a solid boundary.338 Another
effort to model the hydrodynamic interaction of pairs of
flagellar-driven 1-micron diameter bacterial swimmers found that
cells are attracted toward each other when they are swimming side
by side and are repelled when swimming one behind the other.336
The researchers also modeled two microswimmers approaching each
other from opposite directions along parallel but non-coaxial
paths.336 As the two cells pass, they move closer together, causing mutual
cell rotations which lead to a significant change in swimming
orientation. Eventually the cells move away from each other along
a straight, now-coaxial path whose deflection angle to the original
path is determined by the initial off-axis separation of the two cells
Fig. 9.18. Disturbed flow streamlines in progressively higher-angle
blood vessel bifurcations. A) Axisymmetric-constricted tube with no
bifurcation (redrawn from Karino et al1359). B) 45˚ bifurcation
(redrawn from Motomiya and Karino1364). C) 90˚ bifurcation
(redrawn from Karino, Motomiya, and Goldsmith1404). D) 150˚
bifurcation (redrawn from Karino et al1359).
A
B
C
Fig. 9.19. Hydrodynamic interaction of approaching flagellates
(redrawn from Dillon, Fauci, and Gaver336).
D
308 Nanomedicine • Volume I
(Fig. 9.19)—a motion vaguely reminiscent of the “planetary slingshot”
maneuver often performed by NASA spacecraft to change direction.
This unusual cell-cell hydrodynamic interaction has now been
observed experimentally in E. coli traversing fluid in a glass
microcapillary.1371 Hydrodynamic interactions among bacterial
flagellar swimmers are greatest when cell separation distances are
less than the overall length of the cells including the length of the
flagella, or  10 microns.336
In 1998, relatively little was known about the likely hydrodynamic
behavior of nanorobots in the close company of large numbers of
other nanorobots and natural blood cells. Differing sizes, shapes,
and surface characteristics may lead to subtle and unexpected
hydrodynamic interactions. For example,846,3579 leukocyte axial
velocity in capillaries is slightly lower than that of erythrocytes
because the white cell surface undergoes a smaller deformation during
flow due to the higher stiffness and larger volume of a leukocyte—
e.g., the relative velocity ratio is 0.88 in a 6.8-micron diameter
capillary, is somewhat closer but still under 1.00 in larger vessels,
and differs among leukocyte types.1353 This small velocity differential
causes an axial redistribution of a train of erythrocytes in the presence
of a white cell. Upstream from the leukocyte, red cells bunch up,
forming a region of elevated hematocrit; downstream, a plasma gap
develops, increasing linearly with time and with the velocity differential between the white cell and the next red cell down the
line.1354,1356 Upon entering a postcapillary venule, the configuration
breaks up as the erythrocyte immediately upstream of the leukocyte
passes the white cell and pushes it laterally against the vessel wall, often
causing the white cell to attach to the endothelial surface of the
venule. (Without red cells, leukocytes make no regular attachment
to the venous endothelium1356,1357). The remaining red cells then
close up the gap in the flow.1356 Medical nanorobots may exhibit
equally unusual flow behaviors.
Self-organizing spatial patterns may also arise in mixtures of
nanorobot-size particles of different shapes and sizes, a process which
minimizes entropy.2168 Entropic forces become significant at scales
of a few tens of nanometers to several microns.2168 For example,
micron-diameter spheres mixed with micron-long, 10-nm thick rods
in water solidify into two arrangements as water is removed—one a
“cake” with layers of vertical rods alternating with a thin frosting of
balls (a stacked, lamellar arrangement akin to cell plasma membranes)
and the other a lattice of vertical columns of clustered spheres
embedded in a horizontal sea of parallel rods (a columnar arrangement
often found in glues).2169 Other less-stable patterns such as ropes
with lamellar order and chains of rod packets interspersed with
spheres are also observed. In another series of experiments, small
spheres  100 nm in diameter were mixed with large spheres ~500
nm in diameter in a ~1000:1 ratio, and the small spheres pushed
the larger ones against the hard, flat container walls. Large balls
were also forced against the most curved sections of the inner walls
of pear-shaped rigid vessels.2170 These entropic forces are attractive
at low concentrations of small spheres, but at higher concentrations
the force alternates between repulsion and attraction.2170
9.4.2.4 Force and Power Requirements
Consider a spherical nanorobot of radius Rnano that is falling at
uniform velocity vnano through an incompressible (Newtonian) fluid
of viscosity η. If the Reynolds number NR << 1 (Eqn. 9.65), then
Stokes1373 found that the total force of resistance imparted on the
sphere by the fluid is given by:

F 6 R v (newtons) nano nano nano = π η {Eqn. 9.73}
also known as Stokes law. This result applies only in the case of a
single sphere in an infinite expanse of homogeneous viscous fluid,
and neglects all inertial terms. If the fluid container is finite in size,
or if there are other spheres in the neighborhood, or if inertial forces
cannot be entirely ignored because NR  1 (e.g., Rnano = 1 micron,
vnano > 1 m/sec in water), then the equation must be corrected.1374
Dynamic effects due to sphere oscillation, sudden release from rest,
or variable speed also require corrections,1374 and there are other
corrections for neighboring spheres.1375 Most of these corrections
are of order near-unity for micron-scale objects.
Eqn. 9.73 provides a useful approximation of the motive force
required to drive a spherical nanorobot through blood plasma.
Assuming a perfectly efficient drive mechanism, the power requirement337 is at least:

P F v

 6 R v (watts)
nano nano nano
nano nano
2
=
= π η {Eqn. 9.74}
For example, a force of Fnano = 200 pN and a power of at least
Pnano = 2 pW are required to drive a Rnano = 1 micron spherical
nanorobot at vnano = 1 cm/sec through blood plasma at 310 K with
η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec. These formulas may also be used to estimate
nanodevice velocity, given Fnano or Pnano.
Of course, drive mechanisms are not perfectly efficient. Propulsion
efficiency is often poor for objects that swim at low Reynolds numbers
(e.g., typically NR ~ 10-3 for flagellates).3578 A sphere driven by a
helical propeller (e.g., flagellar propulsion; Section 9.4.2.5.2) of
arbitrary length may have a propulsion efficiency as low as e% ~
0.01(1%).389 Propulsive efficiency for organisms with spherical heads
10-40 times larger than their flagellar radius (optimum shape),
using helical flagellar beats, ranges from e% = 0.10-0.28 (10%-28%),1377
requiring a propulsive input power of ~Pnano/e% ~ 7-20 pW in the
previous example. Other drive mechanisms may prove more efficient.
Force requirements for nonspherical nanorobots are similar in
magnitude. For example, consider a cylinder of radius Rnano and
length Lnano translating uniformly in a direction normal to its axis.
Lighthill1367,1376 shows that the force (applied at the midpoint)
required to move this object at velocity vnano is given by:

F 8 L v
1 ln L
R
 (newtons) nano nano nano
nano
2
nano
2
N =
+ 





π η {Eqn. 9.75}
for Lnano >> Rnano.
363 (If the perpendicular force is applied at a
distance c from one end of the cylinder, then the Lnano2 term in
Eqn. 9.75 is replaced by 4 c (Lnano - c) when c >> Rnano.) Eqn.
9.75 does not hold for a perpendicular force applied near the
ends of the cylinder. Also, a constant Fnano actually produces a
slowly varying velocity field along the cylinder length; for a
midpoint-applied force, vnano is at maximum at the midpoint,
but the percentage variation over most of the cylinder is not
large.363 Experiments show that needle-shaped bodies fall in viscous
media about half as fast sideways as they do end-on;1378 that is,
the force on a long cylinder translating parallel to its axis is FnanoP
~ (1/2) FnanoN. The power requirement is then calculated as in
Eqn. 9.74.
Interestingly, there seems to be a sharp minimum size limit
of ~0.6 microns for free-swimming foraging microbes, below
which size locomotion has no apparent benefit.3581 This theoretical conclusion is supported by the observation that the smallest 97
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 309
genera of motile bacteria have a mean length of 0.8 microns,
whereas 18 of 94 nonmotile genera are smaller.3581
9.4.2.5 Nanomechanisms for Natation
Swimming motions consisting purely of reciprocal deformations
(e.g., shape A deforms into shape B, then retraces the same motion
back to shape A) cannot produce forward progress in a
viscosity-dominated environment.389,1386 For example, in the
macroscale world, a scallop may open its shell slowly, then close it
rapidly to squirt out water, relying upon inertia and “coasting” to
carry it forward a little bit each cycle. At the low Reynolds numbers
of most medical nanorobots, such single-hinge deformations yield
only back-and-forth motion. Indeed, Fukuda et al1385 estimate that
a vibrating-fin-driven water-swimming robot shorter than ~6 mm
can no longer overcome viscous drag.* Purcell389 notes that the
simplest possible mechanical swimmer may require at least two
hinges and a cyclical deformation loop traced out in a
two-dimensional configuration space.
At least four distinct classes of mechanisms for natation are readily
distinguished, as described below.
9.4.2.5.1 Surface Deformation
The use of flexible or metamorphic surfaces (Section 5.3) allows
natative structures to deform asymmetrically. For example, it is
impossible to “row a boat” that is fully submerged in a viscous fluid,
because the stiff oars are simply reciprocating. But if the structures
are flexible, then the oar can bend one way during the first half of
the stroke and the other way during the second half, providing an
asymmetry that permits the object to advance (Fig. 9.20). If the oar
is metamorphic and can also vary its total surface area throughout
the cycle, then this asymmetry can be enhanced.
Another example is the metamorphic doughnut-shaped
nanorobot (Fig. 9.21A). An invaginating torus (e.g., a “smoke ring”
motion) can swim along a vector normal to the torus plane because
its outer surface is larger and moving faster than its inner surface (in
the doughnut’s “hole”), giving rise to a differential viscous force in the
same direction as the inner surface is moving—the
opposite travel direction from what might be expected in an
inertia-dominated environment. Differential rotation of circumaxial
surface segments allows steering.
Yet another example proposed by Purcell is a single device
constructed as two reversibly-adhered continuously-rotating spheroids
(Fig. 9.21B). The spheroids stick together but are free to roll all
over each other’s surfaces, by selectively binding and releasing
mateable surface elements. A differential viscous force arises because
the outermost surface of the pair is always fully bathed in viscous
fluid but the inner contact surface is partially shielded from the
fluid. By altering speeds and rotational axes, the pair can establish a
velocity vector in any direction in three-dimensional space. A similar
locomotive method is provided by Solem’s “viscous-lift helicopter”
design (Fig. 9.22). Viscous drag on each of the four rotating wheels
is Fwheel ~ (16 π / 3) η νwheel Rwheel2 for wheels of radius Rwheel
turning at frequency νwheel (Hz) in a medium of viscosity η, and
device mass is mnano ~ 2 π ρnano Rwheel
3 for a device of density
ρnano.
1982 Taking νwheel = 10 KHz, Rwheel = 1 micron, ρnano = 2000
kg/m3
, and η ~ 10-3 for water, then Fwheel ~ 170 pN per wheel, or
~0.7 nN for the whole device. There is a vast range of possibilities,
according to Purcell:389 “Turn anything—if it isn’t perfectly symmetrical, you’ll swim.”
While incompressible tangential surface deformations alone are
not propulsive, even single-sphere swimmers can translate or rotate
using specific cyclic, nonreciprocal, compressible surface distortions
(i.e.,traveling waves). Such waves have been suggested as the mode
of locomotion employed by appendageless spheroidal
cyanobacteria,1388 and surface undulations passing backward from
the advancing edge of the cell have been observed in mammalian
fibroblasts.1467 Swimming speed for an object of radius Rnano is ~10
Rnano per second using a radial deformation of ε~ 0.05 (5%); with n
= 10 surface ripples, energy efficiency is approximated by e% ~ (3
* The smallest known swimming fish is the dwarf pygmy goby (Pandaka pygmaea), measuring 7.1-9.7 mm long in the adult form.739
Fig. 9.20. Flexible oar (redrawn from Purcell389).
Fig. 9.21. (A) Invaginating torus; (B) Sticky spheroids; redrawn from
Purcell389).
Fig. 9.22. Viscous-lift helicopter design (modified from Solem1982).
310 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Fig. 9.23. The metachronal ciliary array of the paramecium. 1225,1380,1406 Fig. 9.24. Schematic of screw drive.
π2 n / 128) ε2 = 0.006 (0.6%) for ε << 1.1388 (If the waves are not
shallow, and (n ε) > 1, then the peak-to-peak spacing becomes less
than the peak-to-valley depth, whereupon friction from the vertical
movement of the waves’ walls should dominate energy consumption.)
A more familiar example of a deformable natation structure is
the simple cilium (Section 9.3.1.1). In ciliate protozoa, cilia are
typically much shorter than body length and are arranged in large
numbers in rows on the body surface. Individual cilia have a regular
beat pattern, typically including a rapid forward power stroke at
full extension, followed by a slower return or recovery stroke with
the cilium bent close to the body surface. Ciliary arrays (Section
9.3.4) may also display metachronism, or time-synchronized wave
patterns, that can be used for precision steering and speed control,
as, for example, by a 60 micron x 220 micron (~600,000 micron3
)
Paramecium caudatum, which rotates as it progresses forward in its
path (Fig. 9.23) using the ~2500 cilia on its outer surface.526
Metachronal waves traveling in the same direction as the power stroke
are symplectic; such waves are antiplectic if they travel against the
power stroke, and are dexioplectic or laeoplectic (or, more generally,
diaplectic) when the power stroke is to either side of the line of
wave propagation.1405,3555 The swimming paramecium may adjust
its wave patterns while negotiating a liquid medium of varying
viscosity.1406,3558 These and similar results should be generalized
and extended to the case of nanorobotic ciliary propulsion.
For a medical nanorobot coated with propulsive cilia with wave
velocity vcilium, then vnano/vcilium = 0.125-0.25 and e% = 0.125-0.30
(12.5%-30%).1379,1380 If vnano = 1 cm/sec, then vcilium ~ 4-8 cm/sec
giving pshear ~ 2-6 N/m2 (Section 9.4.2.2), well within the normal
range for human blood and probably nonthrombogenic to platelets.
Ciliary propulsion even by large protozoa costs relatively little
energy. For example, a 220-micron long paramecium swimming at
~1 mm/sec in water experiences ~1 nN of drag force and consumes
Pdrag ~ (1 pW / e%) of power to locomote, but the animal can be
very inefficient because ~10,000 pW are available to a paramecium
with power density ~104 watts/m3 (est. from Table 6.8). Observed
propulsion velocities of paramecia range from 0.2-2.5 mm/sec.1460,3586
9.4.2.5.2 Inclined Plane
Another class of mechanisms for natation makes use of the
inclined plane, a basic mechanical device that can convert viscous
forces into forward motion. The simplest example is a threaded screw.
In standard propeller theory at high Reynolds number, forward thrust
is proportional to the rate at which a mass of fluid can be ejected
out the rear (e.g., inertial forces). However, at low Reynolds number,
the fluid that is pushed backwards by the rotating tilted planes does
not provide thrust primarily by its inertial movement, but rather
serves as a resistive medium against which the device can push itself
forward. In the world of the nanorobot, the environment is very
thick and viscous. The motive effect is not unlike the forward
motion achieved by a threaded screw as it is screwed into a piece of
wood using a screwdriver.3580
The motive force and power consumption of a microscale screw
drive (Fig. 9.24) with pitch angle ϕ and mean radius Rscrew may be
very crudely approximated as follows. Consider a helical ribbon of
width wthread and total length lthread that is wrapped around an
axially-translating cylindrical body, making a pitch angle ϕ as
measured from normal to the direction of travel of the screw body.
From Stokes law (Eqn. 9.73), a square element of that ribbon with
area wthread2 experiences a maximum drag force of ~6 π η wthread
vthread. There are nelement = lthread/wthread square elements in the
entire ribbon; neglecting flow field interactions of the elements and
of the solid center for this approximation, the maximum laminar
drag force on the entire ribbon is Fmax ~ 6 π η lthread vthread. Viscous
drag is lowest at ϕ = 0˚ (edge on) and highest at ϕ = 90˚ (face on);
a factor of (3-cos(2ϕ))/4 captures the experimental behavior of
needle-shaped bodies which fall in viscous media about half as fast
sideways as they do end-on (Section 9.4.2.4), with periodicity of π.
The number of threads around the screw is Nthread = lthread cos(ϕ)) /
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 311
(2 π Rscrew) and the screw rotates at a frequency νscrew = vthread /
(2 π Rscrew), hence the total force required to turn the screw is:

F 6 N R (3 cos(2 ))
cos( ) screw
3
screw thread screw
2
= π ην ϕ −
ϕ {Eqn. 9.76}
with total drag power Pscrew ~ Fscrew vthread = 12 π4 η νscrew2
 Nthread
Rscrew3 (3-cos(2ϕ)) / cos(ϕ). To further simplify the calculation, we
assume a “no slip” condition such that each complete revolution of
the screw carries the nanorobot forward by a distance ~ 2 π Rscrew
tan(ϕ), although more slip may occur as the thread becomes looser
(e.g., at high ϕ and low Nthread). To avoid turbulence in fluid passing
through the threads, from Eqns. 9.29 and 9.65, we must require
vthread << 2000 η / ρ L, a condition easily met for L ~ 1 micron
devices. Under “no slip” conditions, the velocity of forward translation
is approximated by vnano ~ 2 π Rscrew νscrew tan(ϕ), giving from Stokes
law a net forward towing force of Fnano ~ 6 π η Rscrew vnano and a net
mechanical efficiency e% ~ 2 cos(ϕ) tan2
(ϕ) /[π Nthread (3-cos(2ϕ))].
Taking Rscrew = 1 micron, wthread = 0.1 micron, Nthread = 1 turn,
ϕ = 60˚, η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec for plasma at 310 K, and νscrew =
920 Hz, then vnano = 1 cm/sec, Fnano ~ 200 pN, vthread = 0.6 cm/sec,
total power requirement is Pscrew ~ 7.6 pW, efficiency is e% ~ 0.27
(27%), and the pressure at the screw thread surface is pthread = Fscrew
/ (lthread wthread) ~ 103 N/m2 << ~5 x 105 N/m2 (required to induce
transient cavitation in water at this frequency; Section 6.4.1). The
outside edge of the screw thread is blunted to minimize energy transfer
to impacted biological blood elements. A second counterrotating
reverse-threaded screw mounted coaxially doubles the motive force
while reducing net viscous torque on the natator to zero. If each
screw of the screw-pair is mounted on gimbals, the nanorobot can
achieve controlled translation and rotation in any direction in
three-dimensional space; changing leading screw rotation from
clockwise (CW) to counterclockwise (CCW) enables the nanodevice
to reverse direction or to undertake more complex motions.
Another well-known instance of the inclined plane in locomotion
is the corkscrew drive (Fig. 9.25), of which the bacterial flagellum is
the most familiar biological example.216,581,1395,1397 The flagellum
works because of the differential viscous forces felt by thin cylinders
passing through fluid at various angles of attack (e.g.,
because FnanoN  FnanoP; Section 9.4.2.4). The typical bacterial
flagellum is a closely-packed rigid helix ~20 nm in diameter (with a
~3 nm flagellin protein core), and its length is almost always more
than 100 times its thickness,338 up to 10 microns long. The bacterial
flagellum is turned by a ~0.0001 pW motor that rotates up to 300
Hz at 310 K (~15 Hz under load) and can reverse its direction of
rotation in ~1 millisec (Section 6.3.4.2). The bacterium typically
uses about 0.1% of its available metabolic energy (under growth
conditions) to run the flagellum.581 Forward motion may be achieved
using either planar waves or (more efficient) spiral/helical waves.
The highest swimming speed attainable by a flagellate (body length
up to 50 microns with flagella >100 microns long in eukaryotes) is
~50% of the front-to-back wave speed of its flagellum,1380 although
~20% is more typical.1401 Measured swimming speeds are up to
100-200 microns/sec in various sperm species.1449 The flexural
rigidity of the bull sperm flagellar tail is 30 x 10-21 N-m2 in the
rigor state, and 2 x 10-21 N-m2 in the more flexible state in the
presence of ATP;1451 see Eqn. 8.6. Energy efficiency may vary widely
(Section 9.4.2.4).
9.4.2.5.3 Volume Displacement
Locomotion may also be achieved in a high-viscosity medium
by physically removing fluid from the path ahead, then occupying
the void before it closes up, and filling the volume behind with the
vacated fluid—a process not unlike a tunneling mole. Forward
velocity is largely determined by the speed at which blocks of fluid
can be transferred from one end of the nanorobot to the other,
whether along internal or external pathways.
Fluid pumping (Section 9.2.7) provides the simplest means of
volume displacement. Consider a tube of radius rtube = 100 nm and
length ltube = 1 micron installed across the diameter of a 1-micron
wide spherical nanorobot (Rnano = 0.5 micron), along with a single
positive displacement piston pump of single-cycle displacement
volume Vcycle = 0.008 micron3 (Fig. 9.1). From the relations given
in Section 9.2.7.2, operating the pump at νpump = 1 MHz produces
a time-averaged fluid flow velocity of vflow = 26 cm/sec, a volume
flow rate of Vpump = 8000 micron3
/sec, a nanorobot velocity of vnano
= Vpump / π Rnano2 = 1 cm/sec, and a power draw of Pflow ~ 1800
pW. From Eqn. 9.25, ∆p ~ 2 atm across the nanorobot diameter,
though this might be reduced to ~0.02 atm by flaring the entry and
exit portals. Power usage, operating pressure, and the risks of clogging
or fouling are relatively high, but this system has the virtue of
simplicity, occupies less than 8% of total device internal volume,
and can be expanded to three-dimensional motility by adding
orthogonal entry portals. Jet propulsion is energy inefficient at small
sizes and high speeds.2022
9.4.2.5.4 Viscous Anchoring
By extending ahead of it a structure whose surface area is
capable of being expanded, a nanorobot can set an anchor forward
along its path, then winch itself towards the anchor. In a typical
cycle, the deflated anchor is thrust forward. Then the anchor is
expanded tenfold in area (thus increasing its viscous resistance to
backwards movement by approximately tenfold). The nanorobot
pulls itself forward by attempting to reel in the anchor. The anchor
is then deflated, and the cycle is repeated. The anchor mechanism
may resemble an umbrella that is opened and closed, or a balloon
that is inflated and deflated, at the end of a telescoping rod. A second
anchor placed aft and countercycled with the first permits continuous
motion by alternating pushing with pulling; noncoaxial anchor
settings allow arbitrary rotation and access to all headings in
three-dimensional space.
Fig. 9.25. Flagellar corkscrew (redrawn from Purcell389).
312 Nanomedicine • Volume I
* But only “relatively”—for example, the multi-body collision frequency is appreciable among red cells even at hematocrits as low as 5%.1358
Energy efficiency can be good because less fluid may be sheared
during nanorobot movement, although in 1998 this method had
not been widely studied. If the forward anchor is pushed many
diameters ahead before inflation, then even the expansion of an
anchor much larger than the nanorobot might prove less
energy-expensive than anything except a device with skin than could
flow backwards to match laminar streamlines (Section 5.1).
9.4.2.6 Additional Considerations
The need for safe shear stresses (Section 9.4.2.2), and nanorobot
power requirements for swimming (Section 9.4.2.4), both suggest
that the maximum sanguinatation velocity to be employed by
nanorobots in the human body in normal circumstances should be
 1 cm/sec. Also, from Eqn. 9.65, a 1-micron nanorobot in water
has a Reynolds number NR ~ v; hence, to remain in the purely
viscous regime, v << 1 m/sec. The following analysis provides
additional support for this speed limit.
Consider a spherical nanorobot of radius Rnano swimming at
velocity vnano in the bloodstream, that impacts a passing blood cell.
Virtually all cells encountered in this way will be erythrocytes. The
elastic modulus for the viscoelastic red cell plasma membrane is
Ecell ~ 103
 N/m2
 for isoareal deformation (pure shear), ~105
 N/m2
at low areal strain (elastic area compressibility modulus), and the
rupture strength is ~106 N/m2
.
1325 The force that is driving the
sphere Fnano (Eqn. 9.73) may be distributed over the smallest possible
impact area ~π Rnano2
, and the resulting stress must be less than the
rupture strength or elastic modulus to prevent significant damage
or deformation of the cell surface, hence:
v R E
6 (m/sec) nano nano cell < η
{Eqn. 9.77}
Taking η ~ 7 x 10-3 kg/m-sec (Table 9.4) for the red cell contents
(~0.33 gm/cm3 hemoglobin solution) and Rnano = 1 micron, then
the impacted erythrocyte deforms slightly with no change in surface
area when vnano  2 cm/sec, deforms significantly with some change
in surface area when vnano ~ 2 m/sec, and finally ruptures when vnano
 20 m/sec. This suggests a conservative maximum velocity of  2
cm/sec for medical nanorobots traversing the human bloodstream,
consistent with our proposed ~1 cm/sec speed limit.
Nanorobot biocompatibility3234 is an issue of crucial importance
in nanomedicine (Chapter 15). Consider a fleet of Nnano = 3 Vblood
Nct / 4 π Rnano3 nanorobots uniformly deployed in a blood volume
Vblood populated by red blood cells of typical length LRBC. Each
nanorobot swims past ~vnano/LRBC red cells per second, of which
some small fraction κx are injured as a result of the encounter. If the
iatrogenic injury rate is conservatively set equal to the natural rate
of erythrocyte loss in the human body, or K0 ~ 3 x 106
 sec-1, then:

κ
π x nano
3
0 RBC
blood nano
4 R K L
3 V Nct v
 {Eqn. 9.78}
Taking vnano = 1 cm/sec, LRBC ~ 7 microns, Vblood = 5400 cm3
,
and a 1 cm3 therapeutic dose of Rnano = 1 micron medical nanorobots
(which implies Nnano ~ 2 x 1011 nanorobots and Nct ~ 0.02%),
then κx 10-8. This amounts to a net erythrocyte injury rate of
only LRBC / (vnano κx) ~ 1 cell/day per nanorobot—a challenging
but probably attainable goal. (K0 ~ 2 x 106 sec-1 for platelets, 0.3-2
x 106 sec-1 for blood leukocytes.) Higher rates of red cell damage in
theory could be accommodated by administering compensatory
erythropoietin to stimulate RBC production (Chapter 22), but this
approach would violate the general nanomedical design principle
of avoiding iatrogenic harm whenever possible (Chapter 11).
Another velocity-related consideration involves the largely
cell-free plasmatic zone (the “nanorobot freeway”) that extends 2-4
microns from noncapillary blood vessel walls (Section 9.4.1.4), with
the larger width occurring at higher shear rates.362 Even in very
narrow capillary blood vessels, moving red cells never come into
solid-to-solid contact with the endothelium of the blood vessel. There
is always a thin fluid layer in between, that serves as a lubrication
layer.362 In experiments with glass capillaries 7.6-8.5 microns in
diameter, the apparent plasma layer thickness δplasma ~ 0.6 microns
for a red cell velocity vRBC ~ 0 mm/sec, δplasma ~ 1.0 microns at vRBC
~ 0.5 mm/sec, and δplasma ~ 1.4 microns at vRBC ~ 1.5 mm/sec.1399
This layer will usually be wide enough to accommodate most
bloodborne nanorobots, which are expected to be 2 microns or
smaller in diameter.
Note that a 1 cm3 therapeutic dose of 1 micron3 nanorobots
includes ~1012 devices, each of cross-sectional area ~1 micron2
. Such
a fleet would occupy ~1 m2 if spread out uniformly on a surface,
adjacent and one layer thick. The total surface of the entire human
vascular system is ~313 m2
, but the summed area of all large veins
and main arterial branches alone totals ~1 m2 (Table 8.1). Thus,
small therapeutic doses of medical nanorobots may safely travel the
cell-free plasmatic “freeway” at somewhat higher speeds than previously estimated, though possibly at the expense of significantly
greater power consumption (Section 9.4.2.4) and possibly, at the
highest number densities, interfering with the lubrication effect
normally provided by the plasmatic layer, especially in the capillaries.
The need to maintain moderate viscosity of nanorobot-rich blood
(Section 9.4.1.4) and to avoid complete plug flow in the narrowest
human capillaries (Section 9.4.1.5) implies that the maximum
nanocrit to be employed by nanorobots in the human bloodstream
in normal circumstances should be Nct  10%. The following
simple analysis provides another constraint that is consistent with
this estimate, and is valid for rigid and metamorphic nanorobots
alike.
The frequency of close encounters and collisions among
nanorobots may be taken as a conservative metric of the likelihood
of physical jamming, mission interference, and other pathological
effects of crowding. Consider a spherical nanorobot of radius Rnano
and volume Vnano = (4/3) π Rnano3
, and a second spherical nanorobot
of identical size that approaches the first until the two are in contact,
defining a “collision” event. If the number density nnano = 3 Nct /
[4 π Rnano3
 (1-Hct)] of a uniformly distributed population of such
nanorobots exceeds 2 devices within a spherical volume of radius 2Rnano,
then, on average, all devices are in collision. This defines a maximum
upper bound for nanocrit of NctmaxHi  (1-Hct) / 4, representing the
onset of a highly collisional state; NctmaxHi = 13.5% for Hct = 46% in
the arteries, 22.5% for Hct ~ 10% in the capillaries. Similarly, if the
nanorobot number density is less than 1 device within a spherical
volume of radius 2Rnano, then each device, on average, is surrounded
by a nanorobot-free zone the width of a single nanorobot radius, and
collisions in a uniformly distributed population are relatively infrequent,*
defining NctmaxLo ~ (1-Hct) / 8. For Nct  NctmaxLo, the nanorobot
population begins transitioning to an increasingly collisional state;
NctmaxLo = 6.8% for Hct = 46% in the arteries, 11.3% for Hct ~ 10%
in the capillaries. Thus in the arteries, an Nct < 6.8% is relatively
noncollisional,* an Nct > 13.5% is highly collisional, and a 6.8% < Nct
< 13.5% (midpoint Nct ~ 10%) is transitional.
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 313
9.4.3 Cytoambulation
Many applications of medical nanorobots will require the ability to
“walk” across biomaterial-embedded cellular tissues, packed-cell
blocks, or vascular surfaces, a process called cytoambulation.
Cytoambulation may involve treading the surfaces of blood or lymph
vessel walls which are lined with endothelial cells; negotiating flexible
surfaces such as the walls of the urinary or gall bladders; traversing
interior synovial or bursal surfaces such as the articular cartilage
inside skeletal joints; and walking the walls of various excretory ducts,
bulbs, tubes, and glands. Cytoambulating nanorobots may be
required to cross various classes of tissue and cellular membranes.
Tissue membranes are typically composed of epithelial and connective
tissues and include:
a. serous membranes lining the cavities of the body and surrounding
the various organs (e.g., the pericardium, pleura, peritoneum, and
meninges);
b. mucous membranes lining the alimentary, respiratory, and
genito-urinary tracts; and
c. fibrous membranes composed entirely of connective tissues (e.g.,
perichondrium, periosteum, and synovial membranes).
Traversing such tissue membranes will often involve crossing the
individual plasma membranes of tissue-embedded cells of various
classes. Nanorobots also may cytoambulate across the surfaces of
motile or free-floating cells, including individual erythrocytes and
red-cell rouleaux, leukocytes, fibroblasts, platelets, large protozoa,
and even some bacteria.
A comprehensive survey of all possible cytoambulatory modes
and requirements is beyond the scope of this book. This Section is
restricted to a discussion of basic cell-surface walking, including the
single footpad contact event (Section 9.4.3.1), cell plasma membrane
elasticity (Section 9.4.3.2), anchoring and dislodgement forces
(Section 9.4.3.3), the physical limits of contact event cycling
(Section 9.4.3.4), and examples of a few specific physical
nanomechanisms for cytoambulation (Sections 9.4.3.5-9.4.2.8). The
reader is encouraged to review Section 8.5.3 on cell structure before
proceeding further.
9.4.3.1 Ambulatory Contact Event
Stripped to its fundamentals, the act of ambulation requires that
a mobile surface (e.g., a footpad) is brought into adhesive contact
with a fixed surface to be traversed. After the contact event has
occurred, the point of adhesion becomes a fulcrum allowing
mechanical leverage to be applied against the fixed surface, thus
permitting forward motion of a mass attached to a lever. The
mobile surface may then be detached from the fixed surface and the
cycle repeated.
Consider a footpad approaching the extracellular surface of a
cell. The footpad first encounters 5-8 nm thick strands of the
circumcellular glycocalyx at a number density of ~105 strands/micron2
,
typically at a distance of 10-100 nm from the plasma membrane
surface (see Section 8.5.3.2). A reversible binding site embedded in
the footpad contact area (Section 4.2.8) can recognize glycocalyx
chains unique to specific cell types or tissues, or more generally any
glycoprotein chain, and then securely bind to such chain until
mechanically released. If cell-type specificity is not an important
design requirement, then a simple reversible mechanical grappling
system may be employed. Each carbohydrate chain may be up to
100-200 nm in length, so a footpad adhering to a cell surface in this
fashion may experience up to ~100 nm of horizontal or vertical free
play in its anchorage. This can seriously degrade the efficiency of
motive levers (e.g., nanorobot legs) 1 micron in length, and can
make ambulatory locomotion nearly impossible for motive levers
100 nm in length. (If the footpad adheres to many chains, free
play is substantially reduced.)
Alternatively, footpads may employ spikelike structures and
glycophobic coatings to penetrate the glycocalyx without injuring
it. At 10-20 nm above the plasma membrane surface, these footpad
structures will encounter the extracellular polar regions of integral
proteins that are embedded in the cellular plasma membrane. Integral
proteins, typically ~100,000 daltons, are present in RBCs at a number
density of ~105
/micron2
; however, ~100 different integral protein
types are present, reducing the number density of any one common
type (e.g., red cell glycophorins) to 103
-104
/micron2
. Free-floating
integral proteins (constituting 20%-70% of the total number1435)
exhibit considerable lateral diffusion but can provide adequate
anchorage if the dwell time is brief enough. Transmembrane proteins
are often immobilized by links to protein networks located near the
cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane, possibly reducing free
play to ~20-30 nm, although many transmembrane proteins are
required to be unattached to the internal cytoskeleton, permitting
them to circulate so they can mediate multi-receptor signal transduction.
Penetrating still further to the plasma membrane surface,
reversibly-hydrophilic footpads may bind with the polar phospholipid
heads of the ~650 dalton molecules comprising the lipid bilayer,
with number density ~2.5 x 106
/micron2 in each of the two layers.
(The erythrocyte plasma membrane contains well over 100 different
lipid species,1430 in much lesser concentrations.) Adjacent phospholipid molecules generally are not bound covalently, so individual
molecules may be extracted from the lipid bilayer with a modest
vertical force (taking ~10 zJ/nm2 interlipid hydrophobic binding
energy (Section 3.5.1) and lipid-lipid contact area ~4 nm2
/lipid
divided by single-layer extraction distance ~4 nm implies a
single-lipid, single-layer extraction force Flipid ~ 10 pN, comparable
to the estimate by Evans1415) and hence provide relatively weak
anchorage in the vertical direction. Although such anchorage may
suffice in many applications, artificial amphipathic transmembrane
anchored structures (Section 9.4.3.3) can provide an even more
secure bond for locomotion and parking.
After the contact event has occurred, the adhesion structure is
used as a fulcrum to apply mechanical leverage against the cell plasma
membrane surface, giving rise to tensile or shear forces at the point
of attachment. How large are these forces?* As a minimal estimate,
we assume that each transmembrane protein is anchored to the
internal cytoskeleton by only a single actin microfilament. An actin
microfilament has a failure strength of ~2.2 x 106 N/m2 (Table 9.3)
and a cross-sectional area of ~30 nm2 (Section 8.5.3.11), thus
requiring a tearing force of ~108 pN for detachment.362 A glycoprotein molecule consisting primarily of a chain of C-C covalent
bonds may have a rupture strength on the order of ~10,000 pN
(Section 3.5.1).
* J. Hoh emphasizes that a large thermal contribution exists for forces in the piconewton range; the smaller the force, the larger the time-dependent contribution. Normal
biomolecular interactions, such as antibody-antigen interactions at 100 pN, have finite lifetimes and will unbind on a timescale of hours or days in the absence of any force.
Even a very small loading force may shift the unbinding timescale significantly downward. As a result, the binding forces for nanorobot footpads will be critically linked to
the speed at which the nanorobot is moving. Hoh believes these variations in force may span orders of magnitude; additional research on nanorobot footpad mechanics is
clearly needed.
314 Nanomedicine • Volume I
* T ~ 6 x 10-3 N/m produces red cell plasma membrane lysis after ~10 sec; time of lysis is a stochastic function that increases to ~120 days (maximum red cell lifetime) at
T ~ 3-4 x 10-3 N/m.1415
**Specifically: 0.05 Hz,3599 0.1 Hz,3600 0.25 Hz,3601 0.33 Hz,3600,3602 0.5 Hz,3603,3604 1 Hz,3604-3609 1.67 Hz,3609 2 Hz,3604 and 5 Hz.3610
When mechanical leverage is applied against the cell surface,
plasma membrane components feel a force in the direction opposite to
the direction of travel of the ambulating nanorobot. Since the plasma
membrane is a fluid, components within the membrane may be free
to slip backwards, reducing traction. For simplicity of analysis,
consider a spherical nanorobot of radius Rnano that inserts a spherical
footpad of radius Rfoot into a lipid bilayer membrane, at the end of
each of Nleg legs each of a width that is small in comparison with
Rfoot (so that the contribution from the legs may be ignored). The
viscosity of the plasma membrane that resists the backward movement
of the footpad is approximately ηmembrane ~ 10 kg/m-sec and the
viscosity of the extracellular fluid is ηextra ~ 10-3 kg/m-sec (Table
9.4). The nanorobot ambulates across the cell surface through the
extracellular fluid at a velocity vnano against a “headwind” of vheadwind
(the fluid speed relative to plasma membrane surface), during which
movement the footpad slips backwards at a velocity vfoot. Equating
the forces on the nanorobot and the footpad from Eqn. 9.73 gives:

v ~ ( N v v (m/sec) nano traction leg foot headwind κ ) − {Eqn. 9.79}
where the coefficient of traction κtraction = ηmembrane Rfoot / ηextra
Rnano. Taking Nleg = 2, Rnano = 1 micron and Rfoot = 10 nm, then
κtraction = 200. Thus with vheadwind = 0, the footpads of a bipedal
nanorobot traveling forward at vnano = 1 cm/sec slip backward within
the lipid bilayer membrane at only vfoot = 50 microns/sec. This process
is functionally similar to the tracked system modeled by kinesin
microtubule transport (Section 9.4.6) wherein productive steps are
directed by protein-protein interaction affinities.
Repeated application of physical forces across a cell surface may
activate mechanical signal transduction pathways mediated by specific
transmembrane proteins such as the integrins and cadherins (Sections
8.5.2.2 and 8.5.3.11). These signals can trigger major changes in
cell behavior and in cellular protein expression. Microfilaments
readily transduce 0.01-2 Hz mechanical signals throughout the
cell.1202 In 1998, it was not yet known whether much higher
frequencies, such as might be employed in cytoambulation, also
induce a significant cellular response, except, of course, in specialized
mechanoreceptor cells such as the cochlear stereocilia.3597,3598 Footpad
target proteins, motions, and operating frequencies should be selected
with the objective of minimizing mechanical signal transduction
effects.
9.4.3.2 Cell Plasma Membrane Elasticity
Does the temporary attachment and passage of a cytoambulating
nanorobot across a cell surface have a significant mechanical effect
on that surface? Cell and plasma membrane deformation can be
quite complex. However, taking the plasma membrane to be a
two-dimensional, incompressible elastic solid, a deformation will
always consist of one or more of three fundamental independent
deformations: expansion without bending or shear (characterized
by the area expansion modulus K, in N/m), elongation (shear) without
expanding or bending (shear modulus µshear, in N/m), and bending
without shear or expansion (bending modulus B, in N-m). Each
mode is discussed briefly, below.
9.4.3.2.1 Plasma Membrane Areal Expansion Elasticity
A nanorobot with a footpad of width Lfoot = 10 nm that applies
a pressure of Pnano = 10 pN / Lfoot2 across a span Lfoot of plasma
membrane surface (and normal to it) creates an isotropic tension of
T ~ Pnano Lfoot = 1 x 10-3 N/m within the membrane, causing the
plasma membrane under the nanorobot to expand uniformly without
shearing or bending. For comparison, the tension required to smooth
out the thermal undulations or “Brownian motion” of the outer
membrane of artificial phospholipid vesicles 10-20 microns in
diameter (typical cell size) was determined experimentally to be
0.01-0.1 x 10-3 N/m.368 At the other extreme, osmotically swollen
red cells will instantaneously lyse* at a plasma membrane tension of
Tlyse = 10-20 x 10-3 N/m1415,1421 or at an elastic modulus with
respect to area dilation of Tlyse / hcell ~ 3 x 106 N/m2
,
1422 where red
cell wall thickness hcell = 8 nm.
The relative area expansion of the plasma membrane under
the nanorobot footpad is ∆A / A = T / K,1415 where the
experimentally-determined area compressibility modulus is K = 0.45
N/m for red cell plasma membrane at 298 K1412,1413,3171,3172 (change
in area compressibility modulus with temperature is -6 x 10-3 N/
m-K)3172; K = 1.7 N/m for certain cholesterol-lipid mixtures.1414
This gives ∆A / A ~ 0.2% or 0.06% for the nanorobot footpad of
size Lfoot described above (2%-4% areal expansion produces
lysis1415), or a mean linear strain of ε = (∆A / A)1/2 ~ 0.04 (4%) or
0.02 (2%). For ε << 1, the footpad depresses the surface by ∆x ~
Lfoot (ε/2)1/2 ~ 1.5 nm into the red cell’s interior. This deflection
represents only ~15% of lipid bilayer membrane thickness and must
be considered modest in most circumstances. For leukocyte plasma
membranes, measured K = 0.636 N/m.846
The design of cytoambulation mechanisms should attempt to
minimize the activation of sodium-ion (and many other)
stretch-activated channels—gated transmembrane channels that are
activated by simply stretching the plasma membrane, or by tension
or stress development in cytoskeletal elements associated with the
cell membrane.362,1506 Such channels have already been implicated
in the maintenance of cell volume.491,1416 Biochemical transduction of
mechanical strain has also been investigated in bone cells during
normal loading. Linear strains of ε < 0.05% were nonstimulative;
those between 0.05%-0.15% maintained normal bone mass, and
strains of ε > 0.15% stimulated osteoblasts to increase bone mass.1417-1419
Linear strains >1% induced osteoblasts to alter morphology, becoming
fibroblast-like,1420 and red cells lyse at ε  20%.362 A limit of ∆A / A ~
0.05% for a 10 nm footpad on a red cell surface would give an
estimate of ~2 pN for the activation threshold. However, a force of
1 pN across a protein stretch sensor of cross-sectional area ~1 nm2
represents an energy density of 106
 joules/m3
, or 10 zJ (~2 kT) for
a ~10 nm3 sensor volume, which is probably close to the limit for
biological force detection consistent with earlier estimates of
nanosensor detection limits (Section 4.4.1).
From these comparisons, it appears that a biological response,
stimulated by plasma membrane areal expansion due to the passage
of nanorobot footpads across the cell surface employing forces typical
in cytoambulation (e.g., ~20 pN; Section 9.4.3.5), cannot be ruled
out. However, in 1998 it was not yet known how efficiently
mechanical pressures cycled at 10-100 KHz are transduced by plasma
membrane stretch sensors, since most mechanical cell stimulation
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 315
experiments have been conducted at frequencies between 0.05-5
Hz.** Energy coupling may be poor due to a large mechanical
impedance mismatch. Looser glycocalyx anchorages also could
minimize stretch activation effects.
9.4.3.2.2 Plasma Membrane Shear Elasticity
A plasma membrane surface can deform by “shear”—elongation
in one dimension while narrowing in another dimension—without
bending or increasing surface area. If a deforming force normal to a
plasma membrane surface is suddenly removed, the membrane surface
will recover its normal unstressed shape in a characteristic time
tsnapback = ηsurface / µshear ~ 0.1 sec,3171where elastic shear modulus µshear
= 6.6 x 10-6 N/m for the red cell plasma membrane at 298 K,3172 as
determined experimentally, and the measured coefficient of surface
viscosity ηsurface ~ 10-6 N-sec/m,3171 is the product of plasma
membrane viscosity (~100 kg/m-sec for RBC; Table 9.4) and plasma
membrane thickness (~8 nm for RBC), with measured ηsurface =
0.6-1.2 x 10-6 N-sec/m for the red cell plasma membrane.371 (The
change in elastic shear modulus with temperature is -6 x 10-8 N/
m-K.3172) Shape recovery is dominated by plasma membrane viscosity,
not cytoplasm viscosity, in some systems, particularly RBCs;362
however, J. Hoh [personal communication, 1999] notes that this
does not hold for all cells, and that for most cell types it is the
cytoplasm that dominates the rheological properties, as
experimentally measured, for example, by indentors or piezo controlled microplates.3611 The time required for a leukocyte to enter a
capillary is ~1000-2000 times longer than the time required by red
cells,846 suggesting tsnapback ~ 100 sec for white cells.
With nanorobot legswing frequency νleg >> tsnapback-1, a section
of plasma membrane distorted by the passage of one nanorobot
footpad may not be able to resume its fully relaxed state before the
arrival of another footpad in the same spot as the first. If a traverse
through a narrow passage of cell-rich tissue by large numbers of
ambulating nanorobots is contemplated for a particular application,
then footpad placements should be randomized as much as possible
to avoid repeat-deformation grooving, rutting, or other persistent
indentation features in the plasma membrane surface.
9.4.3.2.3 Plasma Membrane Bending Elasticity
The bending stiffness (bending modulus) of the red cell plasma
membrane at room temperature is B ~ 1.8 x 10-19
N-m.371,1203,1411,3171 The energy required to bend the plasma
membrane into a hemispherical cap is ~4 π B ~ 2300 zJ.1203 A
nanorobot footpad of size Lfoot that exerts a backward force F ~ 10
pN against the plasma membrane may cause the membrane surface
behind the footpad to fold into a ripple with radius of curvature
rcurve ~ B / F ~ 20 nm. The dynamic resistance to RBC plasma
membrane folding appears to be limited by viscous dissipation in
the cytoplasmic and external fluid phases.3171 The plasma membrane
has only a very weak resistance to bending.
9.4.3.3 Anchoring and Dislodgement Forces
A footpad which is noncovalently bound only to a single lipid1481
or unanchored protein1482,1483 molecule embedded in the plasma
membrane will slowly move as the membrane molecule(s) to which
it is attached experiences translation diffusion according to the
well-known Einstein-Smoluchowski equation:

∆ τ X (2 D ) (meters) 1/2 = {Eqn. 9.80}
which is readily obtained by combining Eqns. 3.1 and 3.5. For
lipidic probes, translational diffusion coefficients in artificial fluid
bilayer systems generally range from D = 1-10 x 10-12 m2
/sec;1430
for plasma membrane lipids in human fibroblasts, D = 1.6 x 10-12
m2
/sec at 310 K.1431 Proteins reconstituted in phospholipid bilayers
show diffusion coefficients from D = 0.7-8 x 10-12 m2
/sec. LDL
receptors in human fibroblasts have D = 0.2 x 10-12 m2
/sec at 310
K; MHC Class I (HLA) antigens in human neutrophils, lymphocytes and fibroblasts have D = 0.05-0.07 x 10-12 m2
/sec, or 0.15-0.30
x 10-12 m2
/sec in human endothelial cells.1482 There is a weak
dependence on protein molecular size1430—according to Monte
Carlo simulations, a plasma membrane lattice covered up to 82%
with impermeable (protein) domains diminishes D by only a factor
of 20 in comparison to the zero concentration limit.1436 In erythrocyte
plasma membranes, spectrin-anchored proteins such as the
anion transport protein band 3 have D ~ 0.0045 x 10-12 m2
/sec, while
D = 0.25 x 10-12 m2
/sec in spectrin-depleted cells where the same
proteins are no longer anchored;1432,1434 in either case, D = 0.8-1.5
x 10-12 m2
/sec for RBC plasma membrane lipids.1432,1433 A few
covalently glycolipid-linked proteins show exceptionally stable
anchorage,1485 such as the sperm antigen PH-20 with D = 0.00001 x
10-12 m2
/sec.1482
Taking τ ~ νleg-1 ~ 10-100 microsec (Section 9.4.3.5) as the
duration of the anchoring event during legged ambulation, then
attachment to a lipid or an unanchored protein (D ~ 10-12 m2
/sec)
gives a footpad wander of ∆X ~ 4-14 nm, which is probably acceptable
in most applications. Footholds on transmembrane proteins that
are mechanically linked to the submembrane cytomatrix will
require a force of at least 100 pN/molecule to dislodge, and will
have even less free play, given the lower D. Additionally, for a
cylindrical protein of radius R ~ 3 nm traversing a plasma membrane
of thickness h ~ 10 nm, the rotational diffusion coefficient Drot is
given by:1483

D kT
4 R h
380 sec rot
membrane
2
1 = = −
π η
{Eqn. 9.81}
taking ηmembrane ~ 10 kg/m-sec at 310 K, which gives a diffusional
rotation of ∆α = (2 Drot τ)
1/2 = 0.1-0.3 radian taking τ ~ 10-100
microsec.
For much longer parking times (e.g., τ ~ 1 sec), in the classical
fluid mosaic model of the cell plasma membrane (Section 8.5.3.2),
∆X ~ 1 micron for footpads attached to lipids or unanchored proteins.
However, recent work by Kusumi and Sako1476 has demonstrated
that a substantial fraction of unanchored proteins are transiently
confined to domains somewhat smaller than this. According to their
membrane-skeleton fence model, a spectrin-like meshwork (Fig.
8.43) closely apposed to the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane
sterically confines transmembrane proteins to regions on the order
of the cytoskeletal mesh size. The fences appear elastic, because, for
example, transferrin receptors rebound after they strike barriers, and
a small fraction of these receptors seem to be fixed to the underlying
cytoskeleton by spring-like tethers.1477 For cadherins, transferrin
receptors, and epidermal growth factor receptors, the domains
(e.g., the barrier-free path or BFP) are 300-600 nm in diameter
316 Nanomedicine • Volume I
and confinement lasts 3-30 sec.1476-1478 BFPs for the lipid-linked
and membrane-spanning isoforms of the MHC (Section 8.5.2.1) antigens are ~1700 nm and ~600 nm, respectively, at a temperature of
296 K.1479 Confinement was also found for a lipid-linked isoform
of neural cell adhesion molecules (NCAMs) in muscle cells (which
cannot be directly trapped by the cytoskeletal network), with BFP
domains ~280 nm in diameter and a mean trapping time of ~8 sec.1480
Still, footholds to well-anchored proteins may be preferred for the
longest parking times.
An annular footpad of radius Rfoot = 10 nm firmly attached
around its circumference to a ring of plasma membrane-surface lipid
molecules, taking each molecule of area Alipid ~ 0.4 nm2
/molecule
and assuming a single-lipid extraction force Flipid ~ 1 pN (Section
9.4.3.1), achieves an anchorage force Fanchor = 2 π Rfoot Flipid / Alipid
1/2 ~
100 pN (~3 atm); somewhat more compact anchor geometries are
possible. Equally strong footholds may be gained using artificial
amphipathic transmembrane anchors terminated with
~20-nm-diameter expansible submembrane compartments (analogous
cytosolic “anchor domains” are common in cytochemistry; see Figs.
8.33 and 8.34), or using amphipathic transmembrane anchors which
are directly but reversibly secured to the cytomatrix. Taking the
membranolytic limit as 3 x 106 N/m2
,
1422 then a 100 nm2 footpad
can apply up to 300 pN of anchoring force without tearing the
plasma membrane.
A cluster of ten 100-pN anchors can resist at least ~1000 pN of
dislodgement force applied to a medical nanorobot. Most in vivo
dislodgement forces will be considerably smaller than this. For
example, mean shear stress at blood vessel walls due to normal blood
flow is ~2 N/m2 (Section 9.4.2.2), giving a typical dislodgement
force of Fdis ~ 2 pN on a 1-micron2 nanorobot. (The net attractive
force of ~70 pN between red cells in a rouleaux is also ~2 N/m2
;
Section 9.2.3.) Shear stress in partially occluded arteries produces a
maximum Fdis ~ 40 pN, and shearing stresses between venule
endothelium and a rolling leukocyte may reach 100 N/m2 (Section
9.4.2.2), giving Fdis ~ 100 pN if a white cell bumps or rolls over an
anchored nanorobot. Impact by a rapidly sanguinatating nanorobot
moving at 1 cm/sec (Section 9.4.2.4) produces a dislodgement force
of at most Fdis ~ 200 pN.
For comparison, the adhesion strength for the protozoan Amoeba
proteus has been measured as ~100-1000 nN,1456 giving an adhesion
force of 100-1000 pN/micron2 over a focal contact area of ~1000
micron2
.
1454 The tension force exerted by a single fibroblast during
locomotion has been measured as ~165 nN,1461 or ~1000 pN/micron2
(1000 N/m2
). Cell-cell adhesion of T cells and target cells is ~1500
pN/micron2
.
1458
Cytoambulatory dislodgement forces elsewhere in the human
body are equally modest. For example, taking Eqn. 9.58 and crude
estimates using data from Table 9.4 and Section 8.2, shear stress is
~0.001-0.1 N/m2 along the walls of the small intestine and ~0.01-1
N/m2 in the large intestine; at the rectal wall, ~1-100 N/m2 during
normal defecation and ~10-100 N/m2 during explosive defecation;
on the walls of the male urethra, shear stress is ~1 N/m2 during
urination and up to ~10-100 N/m2 during ejaculation; on the esophageal walls, shear stress is ~0.001 N/m2 when swallowing water, ~1
N/m2 while swallowing food, and ~10-100 N/m2 during emesis;
on the corneal surface of the eye, ~0.1 N/m2 during eyelid flapping;
and on the tracheal and nasal surfaces, ~0.001 N/m2 during a sneeze.
9.4.3.4 Contact Event Cycling
How fast can ambulatory contact events be cycled? Molecular
receptors ~10 nm2 in size can bind large (5-10 nm), “common”
(~10-2/nm3
) molecules in tEQ ~ 0.2 microsec (Section 4.2.1). With
~105
/micron2 glycocalyx strands and a similar number of integral
proteins near the cell surface (Section 9.4.3.1), there are ~10 strands
and ~10 proteins under each 100 nm2 footpad. For either glycocalyx
strands or integral proteins, mean separation is ~3 nm giving a
concentration of ~4 x 10-2/nm3 > 10-2/nm3
, thus qualifying as
“common” molecules in the footpad environment. (There are also
~250 bilayer lipid heads directly beneath a 100 nm2 footpad, of
which ~100 are phospholipids, ~50 are cholesterols, 10-75 are
glycolipids, and the remaining 25-90 are other lipids.) Alternatively,
mechanical grippers that close and open on a 5-nm wide molecular
target using a 1 cm/sec jaw speed require ~1 microsec per gripping
cycle.
Finally, a mechanical manipulator appendage traveling at a
conservative ~1 cm/sec (Section 9.3.1) can transit the 10-100 nm
glycocalyx, reaching the plasma membrane surface, if necessary, in
1-10 microsec. A similar amount of time must be allowed for the
limb to be retracted from the cell surface. These figures are all
consistent with a maximum legswing frequency νleg ~ 100 KHz.
9.4.3.5 Legged Ambulation
Consider a 1 micron3 nanorobot cytoambulating using legs
tipped with appropriate footpads to traverse a vascular wall. Each
leg is assumed to be similar in size and function to the 100-nm
long, 30-nm wide cylindrical telescoping nanomanipulator described
in Section 9.3.1.4. Each nanorobot has a total of 100 legs, occupying
7% of the 106 nm2 underside area of the device. To allow tenfold
redundancy, at any one time only Nleg = 10 legs are deployed and in
use. The remainder are stowed as spares.
Ignoring  1% traction losses (Section 9.4.3.1), the total force
that must be supplied by all Nleg working legs is:

F F N F F total dis leg leg nano =+ + {Eqn. 9.82}
The maximum dislodgement or “headwind” force normally
encountered along blood vessel walls is Fdis ~ 40 pN (Section 9.4.3.3).
The viscous force on each leg is approximated by Eqn. 9.75 as Fleg ~
FnanoN ~ 6 pN, taking Lleg = 100 nm, Rleg = 15 nm, and vleg = 1 cm/sec.
From Eqn. 9.73, Fnano ~ 100 pN, taking η = 1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec for
plasma at 310 K, Rnano ~ 0.5 micron, and vnano = 1 cm/sec. Ftotal =
200 pN, easily within the capacity of a single leg (Section 9.3.1.4),
giving an allocation of Ftotal/Nleg = 20 pN per leg. Maximum safe
towing force is  300 pN/leg, assuming 100 nm2
 footpads and
a 3 x 106
 N/m2 membranolytic limit for plasma membrane.1422
Many N-podal gaits are possible.3499-3507 In the most conservative
gait, only 1 leg is moved at a time while the remaining (Nleg -1) legs
stay anchored at their footpads. Given a full center-to-center working
arc of Xarc ~ 80 nm, each leg must travel Xswing = Xarc/Nleg = 8 nm in
a time tswing = Xswing / vleg = 0.8 microsec at a velocity vleg = 1 cm/sec,
with a per-leg duty cycle of fduty = Nleg-1 = 10% and an operating frequency of νleg = fduty/tswing ~ 100 KHz. From Eqn. 9.74, nanorobot
motive power is Pnano = Ftotal vnano / e% ~ 10 pW, taking e% ~ 0.20
(20%). Conservatively taking each footpad binding event as costing
Ebind ~ 100 zJ (Section 4.2.1), then footpad binding power requirement is Pbind = Nleg νleg Ebind ~ 0.1 pW, a negligible contribution.
For the least conservative gait, only 1 leg stays anchored while the
remaining (Nleg -1) legs are in motion. In this case, Xswing = Xarc = 80 nm
giving tswing = 8 microsec and νleg ~ 10 KHz, but motive power,
nanorobot velocity, and leg duty cycle are unchanged. Doubling leg
length to Lleg = 200 nm while holding Rleg, vleg, and vnano unchanged
decreases operating frequency to νleg ~ 5 KHz while increasing Ftotal to
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 317
230 pN and Pnano to 12 pW. Doubling the velocities doubles force
and operating frequency, and quadruples the power demand. Perhaps counterintuitively from common macroscale experience,1486
for small ambulators traveling in viscous-dominated media (e.g.,
low Reynolds number ambulators), shorter legs may produce the
highest motive velocity for the lowest power requirement and
applied force.
As a biological analog, tiny extensible hydraulic tube feet specialized
for burrowing and stepping locomotion, often with terminal suckers,
have been extensively described in echinoderms.1472-1475
9.4.3.6 Tank-Tread Rolling
When an injured cell “calls for help” from leukocytes, the cell
secretes cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF, causing nearby vascular
endothelial cells to express P-selectin and E-selectin on their luminal
surfaces.415 Passing white cells adhere to these protruding molecules
because their carbohydrate coat contains complementary structures.
When a leukocyte touches a venule wall, its rate of movement slows
because of the stickiness between the cell and the wall, but the force
of the circulating blood keeps the cell moving with a tank-tread
motion in what is called a rolling interaction (Fig. 9.28). The average
white cell rolling velocity is only <4% of the mean blood flow
velocity in the venule,361 typically ~10-40 microns/sec.1027,1484,1507
This form of locomotion is easily implemented by rigid medical
nanorobots. A primitive example would be a spherical device with
numerous flexible knobs projecting radially from its surface, located
a distance ∆y apart. A mechanical gripper or binding pad located at
the tip of each knob is switched on or off, depending on the direction
the nanorobot desires to go. Anchored with one knob, Brownian or
hydrodynamic forces cause the device to bounce around until one
of the active knobs contacts the surface, whereupon that knob binds,
and the previous anchor knob releases. The device has now progressed
a distance ∆y in the desired direction. A micron-size nanorobot could
achieve vnano ~ 1 micron/sec in a quiet environment or up to vnano ~
1 mm/sec in blood vessels, at a near-negligible power cost (<< 1 pW)
because only footpads must be operated. In the limit of a flexible
knob-dense surface, a nanorobot with ~1 micron2 of continuous
contact surface could, in theory, tow up to 3,000,000 pN of load
before reaching the ~3 x 106
 N/m2
 membranolytic limit.1422
9.4.3.7 Amoeboid Locomotion
The most common cells exhibiting amoeboid locomotion3613 in
the human body are white cells, having moved out of the blood
into the tissues in the form of tissue microphages or macrophages.
Fibroblasts and normally sessile germinal skin cells can move into
damaged areas to assist in wound repair. Embryonic cells in the
fetus such as neurons often migrate long distances to their final
location by amoeboid movement, after which they become fixed in
tissue as sessile cells. The 200-600 micron carnivorous Amoeba proteus
also displays this form of locomotion and was the subject of the
earliest studies, hence the name.
Amoeboid movement is associated with two properties—cytoplasmic streaming, and the extension and retraction of pseudopods—
the motive effects of which could be simulated by medical
nanorobots using metamorphic exterior surfaces (Section 5.3). As
shown in Figure 9.26, the monopodial amoeboid cell progresses by
establishing a series of attachment points or focal contacts with the
surface it is traversing. Viewed from the side, the amoeba steps forward
on new pseudopods that make adhesive contact with the surface,
with the tail region and retracting pseudopods lifted clear of the
surface.1464 The plasma membrane with its mucus coat is a relatively
permanent structure that plays a passive role during locomotion,1465
rotating forward during locomotion something like a water balloon
rolling across a tilted tabletop.
Inside the plasma membrane are two regions of cytoplasm with
varying viscosity—the actin microfilament-rich outer portion, called
the ectoplasm or cell cortex, and the inner portion called the
endoplasm. To move forward, the ectoplasm at the front end
becomes thin, causing a pseudopodium to bulge forward; the
ectoplasm at the tail end contracts, pushing endoplasm into the
pseudopodium and extending it further.1466 Actin monomers in the
pseudopods are gelated to actin polymers in the pseudopods, then
solated back to monomers in the tail. (Gels depolymerize when Ca++
activates gelsolin protein, which severs actin; actin repolymerizes
into gel when Ca++ concentration is reduced.) The surface for
new pseudopod formation is unfolded from the sink of convoluted
surface in retracted pseudopods and in the tail. In each pseudopod, the
surface rolls forward over the stationary ectoplasmic tube on a
lubricating layer of hyaloplasm dispersed from the hyaline cap.1380
Isolated amoebic cytoplasm, when injected with ATP, streams
spontaneously at up to 160 microns/sec.1394
The formation of a focal contact between fibroblast and surface
is a biphasic process in which the fast (~1 sec) initial phase of
establishing small (~0.25 micron2
) immature contacts at large
separation distances is followed by a slower (~15 sec) phase of
widening mature contacts with narrowing separation distances.1457
Leukocyte pseudopodia are ~1 micron in length with a typical
extension velocity of ~0.08 microns/sec,846 so white cells and
fibroblasts readily cytoambulate at ~0.05-0.1 micron/sec;359,1513
chemotactically-stimulated leukocytes can locomote at up to ~0.7
microns/sec.1516 An individual fibroblast has a towing strength of
~165 nN,1461 giving an implied low-load motive power demand of
only ~0.02 pW (force x velocity). Measured motive force of a whole
amoeba (~towing force) is 50-290 nN,1462,1469 or ~100 nN per
Fig. 9.27. Schematic of neutrophil cytoambulation (redrawn from
Horwitz1511).
Fig. 9.26. Protoplasmic streaming in a monopodal amoeba with
velocity profiles at three loci (modified from Holberton1380).
318 Nanomedicine • Volume I
50-micron pseudopod; internal hydrostatic pressures have been
estimated from 10-100 N/m2 1470,1471 up to ~105 N/m2
.
1453
Ambulatory velocity ranges from 1-50 microns/sec, but averages
~10 microns/sec.1394 A nanorobot using metamorphic pseudopods
spaced ~1 micron apart and cycling its adhesive contacts at 10 KHz
could achieve vnano ~ 1 cm/sec within a ~10 pW motive power budget
(Section 5.3.1.4).
Neutrophils walk from one site to another by forming and breaking
integrin-mediated attachments to a matrix (Fig. 9.27). Integrin
receptor surface density is ~2000/micron2 on neutrophils,1510 with
each fibrinogen attachment having a detachment strength of ~2 pN.1508
9.4.3.8 Inchworm Locomotion
Another ambulatory strategy that has been investigated for medical
robots is inchworm locomotion.1632,3086 In this mode, the tail end
of a flexible tubular nanodevice is anchored. The front end extends
in the desired direction across the cell surface by pushing against
the anchor. Once fully extended, the front end sets anchor. The rear
end unlocks, slides itself forward toward the front anchor across the
cell surface, then resets in preparation for the next cycle. Inchworm
mobility may be particularly applicable to environments with
extremely rough, uneven terrain.3083 A related strategy is “Slinky”
locomotion,3084,3085 which is similar to the inchworm except that
each end temporarily loses contact with the cell surface while it is
extending or retracting by pushing or pulling against the anchor
point.
9.4.4 Histonatation
Histonatation, or swimming through biological tissues, will be
necessary for medical nanorobots that need to reach a specific histological or cellular target to begin diagnostic or repair work. Each
tissue that must be traversed has its own unique set of biochemical,
immunochemical, mechanical, electrokinetic, and other characteristics
that will affect the precise mode and manner of locomotion. A
complete survey of all possible tissue types is beyond the scope of
this book. This Section briefly considers a few important issues in
the following general circumstances—exiting endothelial-cell-lined
blood vessels to enter the tissues (Section 9.4.4.1), passage through
largely acellular tissue (Section 9.4.4.2), passage through cell-dense
tissue (Section 9.4.4.3), and tissue-resident nanorobot conjugation
and partition (Section 9.4.4.4).
9.4.4.1 Nanorobot Diapedesis
The passage of formed blood elements, especially white cells,
through the intact walls of blood vessels, is called transendothelial
migration or diapedesis (Fig. 9.28). Diapedesis is a stereotyped
behavior of certain motile cells that may occur everywhere in the
human body except (usually) through the brain-blood barrier.
Normally, ~75% of circulating neutrophils are adherent to the
endothelium at any time.1491 Following its rolling interaction (Section
9.4.3.6), a leukocyte may abruptly attach to the wall of a venule
and leave the bloodstream by squeezing between adjacent endothelial
cells. Prior to attachment, the leukocyte does not stop rolling until
certain binding events occur between the vessel wall and the white
cell plasma membrane. Rapid triggering (e.g., in a few seconds) of
integrin-mediated adhesion is required for the arrest of bloodborne
lymphocytes and neutrophils at sites of leukocyte recruitment from the
blood. This adhesion is also mediated by pertussis toxin-sensitive Gα1
protein-linked receptors of the rhodopsin-related seven-transmembrane
or serpentine chemoattractant family.982,1027 β2 integrin-mediated
arrest of neutrophils can be triggered through stimulation of the formyl
peptide, leukotriene B4, eotaxin, platelet activating factor, or
interleukin-8 (IL-8) chemoattractant receptors in vivo.982,1484 Particular chemokines (e.g., MIP-2β, SDF-1α, and 6-C-kine) induce flowing
lymphocytes to decelerate and adhere to an integrin target protein within
~500 millisec.1484 Adhesion is then followed by diapedesis, the final
step in extravasation (exiting the blood vessel), given the presence of
appropriate haptotactic (adhesion-gradient) or chemoattractant
(0.0001-1 nanomolar1512,1515 concentration-gradient) signals.
The same β2 and α4 integrins involved in lymphocyte arrest, in
conjunction with other adhesion receptors, trigger the final steps in
transendothelial migration.1027 The junctions between adjacent
endothelial cells in capillaries and venules are normally very narrow,
with parallel plasma membranes forming an intercellular cleft of
~10-20 nm.361,1493 The discontinuous-type endothelium found in
the liver, spleen, and bone marrow (whose functions include the
addition or extraction of whole cells from the blood) have resting
gaps ~150 nm wide.1492 In the final step of diapedesis, biochemical
mediators acting on capillary endothelial cells cause those cells to
loosen their attachments to their neighbors.531 The wall gaps in the
capillaries open more widely, allowing diapedesis of white cells into
the tissues.71 A wide range of pharmacologically active compounds
(including prostaglandins, angiotensins, serotonin, histamine,
epinephrine, and nicotine) have been observed to encourage the
splitting of endothelial junctions along their symmetry plane, followed
by cell separation and the appearance of gaps large enough to allow
passage of whole cells—especially in the postcapillary venules.1493
It also appears that the emigration of neutrophils and monocytes
from the vasculature is normally regulated by at least three distinct
molecular signals—selectin-carbohydrate, chemoattractant-receptor,
and integrin-Ig interactions—acting in sequence, not in parallel.
This establishes a three-digit “area code” for cell localization in the
body, “as if leukocytes carr[ied] cellular phones.”1495 The sequence
in which these signals act on neutrophils and lymphocytes may differ.
(A neutrophil surface typically has 5 x 105 Mac-I integrin receptors
and 2-4 x 104 selectin receptors).1509,1510 Properly configured medical
nanorobots can undoubtedly read these “area codes” as well (Section
8.4.3).
Diapedesis typically requires ~3-10 minutes for the white cell to
complete.1488,1490 Leukocyte emigration occurs by insertion of a
pseudopod into the enlarged gap between endothelial cells, followed
by amoeboid-like migration of the white cell through the blood
vessel wall (Fig. 9.28). Electron microscopic studies have demonstrated
that an efficient protein-tight seal is maintained between endothelial
cells and a migrating leukocyte during all stages of its escape.1489
Endothelial cells are typically 0.5 microns thick, although in
postcapillary venules they may be cuboidal and much thicker.
Nanorobots engaging in diapedesis may release a minute quantity
(e.g., ~0.0005 micron3
/micron3
) 1496 of the RGDS tetrapeptide (a
known adhesion inhibitor),1494 cytoambulate through the widened
Fig. 9.28. Schematic of leukocyte diapedesis.
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 319
endothelial gap possibly using a metamorphic surface to maintain a
protein-tight seal if necessary, then release endothelial movement
inhibitors such as cytochalasin B or endothelial growth inhibitor
protein (EGIP)1494 to encourage endothelial reattachment, returning
the gap to its normal size. (Active chemokine concentrations are
typically ~10 molecules/micron3
; Section 7.4.5.2.) The actual transit
of the gap should require only milliseconds assuming ~mm/sec
ambulation velocities, but a time on the order of seconds could be
required for biochemically-mediated endothelial cell gap width
management. Physical force may be used to spread or to close a
temporary gap much faster (Section 9.4.4.3) but may be inconsistent
with endothelial cell homeostasis. As already noted in Section
8.2.1.3, the lymphatic endothelium can probably open gaps at least
~22.5 microns wide,851 so micron-sized nanorobots should also find
easy passage into and out of the lymphatic system.
9.4.4.2 ECM Brachiation
Taking the standard reference male human body volume of
60,000 cm3 and subtracting ~16,000 cm3 (27%) for fluids, digestive
contents, and expandables (Section 8.2.5), then subtracting another
~27,000 cm3 (45%) for the volume of all tissue cells (Section 8.5.1),
leaves ~17,000 cm3
 (28%) which comprises the intercellular tissue
volume. This volume is thoroughly penetrated by the extracellular
matrix or ECM, a fibrous scaffolding that helps organize cells into
tissues. The ECM contains both protein and carbohydrate components.
(Matrical water is not in the form of a dilute aqueous solution but is
strongly influenced by the macromolecules that are present; diffusion
of small molecules is much slower in matrix water than in bulk
water.)
Nanorobots with at least two appendages can alternately grasp
and release a succession of adjacent ECM elements, brachiating1621
“hand over hand” through tissue in a manner crudely analogous to
a scuba diver pulling himself along an underwater rope mesh ladder.
Similarly, fibroblasts migrating through tissue toward the site of a
wound move toward a chemotactic distress gradient by extending
lamellipodia toward the stimulus while their opposite poles remain
firmly bound until released (haptotaxis). ECM fibrils strongly
influence the direction of migration since cultured fibroblasts tend
to align and migrate along discontinuities in substrata to which they
are attached (contact guidance), and only along, but not across,
fibronectin fibrils.1537
ECMs are composed of different collagen types, elastin, large
glycoproteins (e.g., fibronectin, laminin, entactin, osteopontin), and
proteoglycans that contain large glycosaminoglycan side chains (e.g.,
heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, keratan sulfate,
hyaluronic acid).938,985,1511 While all ECMs share these components,
the organization, form, and mechanical properties of ECMs vary
widely in different tissues. For example, interstitial collagens (e.g.,
Types I & III) self-assemble into a three-dimensional lattice which
binds fibronectin and proteoglycans. This type of ECM hydrogel
forms the backbone of loose connective tissues such as dermis.985
In contrast, basement tissue membrane collagens (Types IV & V)
assemble into planar arrays. When these collagenous sheets interact
with fibronectin, laminin, and heparan sulfate proteoglycan, the
result is a planar ECM scaffolding. The ability of tendons to resist
tension, and of cartilage and bone to resist compression, similarly
results from local differences in the composition and organization
of the ECM.985
Tissues are dynamic structures that exhibit continual turnover
of all molecular and cellular components. The ECM helps to maintain
tissue pattern integrity, allowing cells that are lost due to injury or
aging to be replaced in an organized fashion. For instance, when
tissue cells are killed by freezing or poisoning, all of the cellular
components may die and be removed, but the basement tissue
membrane often remains intact. These residual scaffoldings ensure
correct repositioning of cells (e.g., cell polarity) and proper restoration
of different cell types to their correct locations (e.g., muscle cells in
muscle basement tissue membrane, nerve cells in nerve sheaths,
endothelium within vessels). Conversely, loss of ECM integrity
during wound healing may cause permanent disorganization of
tissue patterns, producing dermal scars.985 The ECM also plays a role
in controlling cell function and morphology. Hepatocytes cultured upon
fibronectin or laminin at low fiber surface density (1-50 ng/cm2
)
exhibit differentiation, but switch to growth at high fiber surface
density (1000 ng/cm2
).1501 Capillary-like tube formation by endothelial cells can be induced by purely mechanical means (simulating
mechanical stresses in the natural ECM).1502 Cells cultured on
substrates containing adhesive islands (mimicking spatial patterns
of ECM adhesivity) change shape to match the shape of the
islands.718
The mesh size of the fibrous components of the ECM varies
widely according to tissue type, but a few generalizations and specific
examples can be given. For instance, the matrical function of collagen
and elastin is mostly structural, while the function of fibronectin
and laminin is primarily adhesive. Yet collagens are also adhesive
for cells and other macromolecules, and fibronectin provides the
major matrical support in clot and early granulation tissue formation
(the first stages of wound repair).985
Collagens are the major proteins of the ECM and comprise ~25%
of total mammalian protein mass.396 The collagen family currently
contains 19 members.971,1497,1498,3614 The collagen molecule is a
long (~300 nm), thin (~1.5 nm) fiber, the center of which is a characteristic triple helix running ~95% of the length.938 Micrographs of
endothelial cells cultured on a disorganized collagen-rich gel show
that the cells quickly remodel the substrate into a network of collagen
pads, cords, cables and bridges with grid sizes ranging from 100-1000
microns.1499 Photomicrographs of excised tissue samples show a gap
of 4-12 microns between adjacent collagen fibrils in skin tissue and
in tendons.938 Cartilage (which contains much collagen) has large
aggregates of proteoglycans, with as many as 100 molecules attached
to a single hyaluronic acid, giving a length of ~10 microns and a
diameter of 500-600 nm; a tissue micrograph of fibrous cartilage in
the disks between the vertebral bodies shows gaps of 10-30 microns
between adjacent fibrils.938
Fibronectin is usually formed as a disulfide-linked dimer consisting
of two 220-250 kilodalton peptide subunits, each containing binding
sites for collagen, for heparin, for the clotting protein fibrin, and
for several other ECM molecules, along with cell surface receptors.938
The main function of laminin (a 50 nm x 70 nm cross-shaped
molecule938) is to mediate the binding of cells to Type IV collagen.
Fibronectins or laminins may be present in ECM at low density
(<1 ng/mm3
) or high density (>5 ng/mm3
),985 giving, from Eqn.
8.7, an estimated typical intermolecular spacing of Lgrid ~ 10
microns at low density and Lgrid ~ 4 microns at high density.
Although the matrix grid can be as narrow as 0.3-3 microns in
special cases such as the ECM between the epidermis and the somites
of the axolotl embryo, or between the highly flexible elastin fibers
in the walls of the aorta,938 in most cases the gaps between ECM
elements should be wide enough for micron-size nanorobots to slip
through without much difficulty. Even quite large rigid objects
should be able to negotiate the ECM. Experimentally, teflon particles
up to 80 microns in diameter were injected extravascularly and
320 Nanomedicine • Volume I
migrated to distant locations around the body including lymph nodes,
lungs, and kidneys.946
From Eqn. 9.75, an isolated cylindrical ECM element ~1
micron long and ~0.1 micron wide could be shoved aside at a lateral
velocity of ~1 mm/sec in plasma with a force of ~5 pN, easily within
the strength limits of medical nanorobots having the appropriate
manipulatory and motive appendages. Chemosensor pads also will
allow the nanorobot to identify fiber type and tissue type (having
unique chemical signatures) as the device crawls or brachiates
through the ECM forest. For example, only two kinds of carbohydrate are found attached to the hydroxylysines of collagen. Elastin
lacks the amino acid methionine. The family of integrins binds
fibronectin, and fibronectin has lots of binding sites. Proteoglycans
typically have a long core protein to which are attached up to 100
very large glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains, with each population
of core proteins having many different carbohydrates, varying in
size, charge, and even composition.938 Sensor pads can make a
cell-type or tissue-type determination in as little as 2 millisec (Section
8.5.2.2), suggesting an upper limit on nanorobot ECM brachiation
of νbrach ~ 500 Hz if chemopositional validation is required at every
step.
What is the maximum safe nanorobot brachiation speed through
the ECM? In theory, a dibrachial armswing of ~1 micron repeated
at ~100 Hz allows an ECM transit speed up to 100 microns/sec
through clear fluid lanes in the matrix. From Eqn. 9.73, the force
required to pull a 1 micron spherical object through 310 K interstitial
fluid (Table 9.4) at 100 microns/sec is ~2 pN, somewhat less than
the ~10 pN likely to stimulate a mechanically-transduced cellular
response (Section 9.4.3.2.1). (One study found that the force
required to break individual integrin bonds to fibrinogen is ~2.1
pN;1508 another study found ~1000 cell adhesion proteoglycan
molecules on each marine sponge cell surface, with pairs on adjacent
surfaces having an experimentally measured adhesion of 40-400 pN
per pair, depending upon Ca++ concentration.1248) Assuming a pair
of 1 micron long, 0.1 micron thick cylindrical nanorobot arms and
applying Eqn. 9.75, an additional ~0.5 pN is required to move each
arm forward, giving a total power requirement of only ~0.0003 pW
for brachiation at ~100 microns/sec. For comparison, a proposal to
drive a millimeter-size “seed” through human brain parenchyma
using external magnetic forces, while maintaining what was believed
to be an adequate margin of safety, was tested experimentally at a
net tissue transit speed of ~8 microns/sec.1256,1257
Natural movement of biological entities through ECM is much
slower. The ECM provides a handhold-rich scaffold for fibroblast
migration.359 Leukocyte and fibroblast amoeboid motion through
extracellular tissue is typically ~0.050-0.7 microns/sec (Section
9.4.3.7), although white cell diapedesis through the blood vessel
walls (~0.005 microns/sec; Section 9.4.4.1) is much slower. Chain
migration of neuronal precursor cells across a restricted pathway in
the brain, through a complex parenchyma between two regions
separated by several millimeters, occurs at ~0.008 microns/sec.947
The migratory speed of cultured smooth muscle cells taken from
coronary and peripheral arterial walls is also only ~0.006-0.015
microns/sec.1503 Epithelial cells migrate over a wound surface in a
sheet at ~0.035 microns/sec, while wound contraction proceeds at
0.007-0.009 microns/sec.359 Osteoclasts tunnel through old bone,
remodeling it, advancing at a rate of only ~0.0006 microns/sec.531
However, inside cytomatrix-rich cells, membrane-bound vesicles
undergo axonal transport at a typical speed ~2-4 microns/sec,938,939
pigment granules in chromatophores move at 2-10 microns/sec,938
and mitochondria (~micron-sized organelles) are shuttled around
the cellular interior at up to ~10 microns/sec,453 so faster ECM
transit speeds up to ~100 microns/sec are probably safe.
9.4.4.3 Intercellular Passage
With just a few notable exceptions, virtually all tissue cells lie
within ~2-3 cell widths of a capillary, or ~50 microns.71,531 Thus a
bloodborne nanorobot may reach any tissue cell by rapidly traveling
most of the way by capillary, then exiting the capillary and crossing
at most 1-2 cells to arrive at a given target cell. In cell dense tissue,
it may become necessary to crawl between adhering cells.
Tissue cells are not packed so tightly that adjacent cell surfaces
are in direct contact with each other. There is usually a space of at
least 20 nm between the opposing plasma membranes of adjacent
cells, wide enough to admit a slender nanorobot manipulator arm
(Section 9.3.1). This space is filled with extracellular fluid and provides
a pathway for substances to pass between cells on their way to and
from the blood in nearby capillaries. Most tissues employ desmosome
or gap junctions2922 wherein the opposing plasma membranes come
within 2-4 nm of each other over a space of ~5 nm on the membrane
surface, with these junctions spaced ~20 nm apart across the plasma
membranes and opposing plasma membranes, retaining a fluid-filled
25-35 nm gap between them. Tight or “occluding” junctions (as in
the endothelial blood-brain barrier and certain epithelial surfaces
comprised of intestinal cells, bladder cells, and some exocrine cells)
have <2.5 nm wide intermembrane gaps.361 None of these spaces is
wide enough to allow passage of whole (even metamorphic) medical
nanorobots. To pass between cells in cell-rich tissue, it is necessary
for an advancing nanorobot to disrupt some minimum number of
cell-to-cell adhesive contacts that lie ahead in its path. After that,
and with the objective of minimizing biointrusiveness, the nanorobot
must reseal those adhesive contacts in its wake, after passage, crudely
analogous to a burrowing mole.
A full treatment of all types of cell-cell contacts and anchoring
mechanisms is beyond the scope of this book, but a few specific
examples can be given. For instance, spot desmosomes (Section 5.4)
are ~30-nm-long “spot weld” molecules linking neighboring cells,
spaced ~8 nm apart across the apposed cellular surfaces. A force of
6-10 pN is required to separate each connexin-32 hepatic cell gap
junction unit (Section 5.4.2). Integrins may average ~20 nm separation, and require ~2.1 pN to separate from a fibronectin molecule in
the ECM,1508 although direct cell-ECM connections are relatively
scarce inside cell-cell junctions.
As a crude estimate, assume that intercellular adhesion molecules
hadhes ~ 30 nm in length are spaced Xadhes ~ 10 nm apart across the
cell surfaces and require Fadhes ~ 10 pN to pull apart,1223 and that an
Lnano ~ 1 micron wide nanorobot wishes to pass through by
dynamically clearing a path ahead that is Lnano wide and Lnano long.
Along the leading edge, Lnano/Xadhes adhesive joints must be detached
one by one, requiring a detachment energy of Edetach ~ Lnano Fadhes
hadhes / Xadhes ~ 30,000 zJ to advance a distance Xadhes. This gives a
power requirement of Ptravel ~ Edetach vtravel / Xadhes ~ 0.003 pW if
the velocity of forward travel through the cell-cell junction is vtravel
~ 1 micron/sec, allowing transit between two adhered 20-micron
cells in ~20 sec. Adding manipulator arm energy dissipation raises
the total to ~0.01 pW (viscous drag power is ~10-5 pW; Eqns. 9.74
and 9.75). Total detachment rate is νdetach ~ Lnano vtravel / Xadhes2 ~ 10,000
detachments/sec, a burden which can be shared by more than one
manipulatory appendage, each equipped with appropriate lytic
end-effectors (e.g., trypsin-like tool tips; Section 9.3.2). Rejoining
the parted cell junctions astern requires, at worst, a similar
energy expenditure; in the case of noncovalent bonds, unassisted
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 321
rejoining may be energetically favorable if the edges have been
left in relative proximity. Reattachment may be facilitated using
a metamorphic nanorobot integument, together with a surfacial
hydrophilic solvation wave drive system (Section 9.4.5.3), to
establish a teardrop-shaped cross-section that can slowly adduct
the separated plasma membrane faces and maneuver the detached
stubs of parted anchor macromolecules into close proximity. Traffic density and frequency should be locally restricted to minimize
mechanical stimulation of unwanted ECM and cytomatrical responses (Sections 9.4.3.2.1 and 9.4.4.2), and especially detachmenttriggered apoptosis (Section 10.4.1.1), perhaps by restricting intercellular passage to nanorobots traveling single-file through a relatively
small number of channels.
9.4.4.4 Nanorobot Conjugation and Partition
Occasionally it may be necessary for two or more motile
nanorobots to dock, or conjugate,3617-3632 during histonatation (e.g.,
Section 8.3.3). Assuming the existence of in vivo communication and
navigation networks (Sections 7.3 and 8.3), two nanorobots that
are attempting to dock can exchange positional information until
the two devices are within a range of ~3 microns. Once within
such close range, the devices switch to ~GHz chirps which, from
Eqn. 4.52, attenuate ~0.001%/nm in 310 K plasma. Using an acoustic
receiver sensitive to 10-6 atm pressure changes, and 0.01-atm
transmitted pulses, and assuming that no other nanorobots are
present and chirping in the immediate vicinity at the same time,
the two nanorobots can locomote up the attenuation gradient to
within ~10 nm proximity, approximately the minimum scale of the
docking mechanism (e.g., metamorphic bumpers; Section 5.4).
Conjugating microbes employ chemical communications to similar
effect.3628,3629
Once physical contact is made, nanomechanical communication at
~1 GHz transfers ~1000 bits during a ~1 microsec contact event
(Section 7.2.4), sufficient to mutually validate identity. A universal
clamp may be used for unrestricted docking among devices of any
machine species that meet in any orientation. Device shape or surface
features can be used to control docking orientation (Section 5.4.1).
Docking clamps can also be designed to connect in only one way if
the spatial or rotational positioning of the conjugated pair is an
important mission requirement; from Eqn. 3.1, Brownian motion
provides ~4000 random docking trials per second for two 1-micron
nanorobots maintaining a mean 10-nm separation in 310 K interstitial
fluid. Docking clamps may serve a purely adhesive function,3630-3632
or may additionally provide communicating junctions that transfer
fluids, power, or data between conjugated devices. Similar procedures
permit three or more nanorobots to conjugate in vivo, and may
allow a growing nanorobot aggregate to sequentially add new members
to the collective at specific locations in the developing structure.
Partition,3617-3619 or separation of linked nanorobots, requires a
defined procedure in which all transtegumental openings in
nanorobots are sealed or valved shut prior to release of docking
clamps and physical separation. Once separated, and depending
upon their mode of locomotion and the timing of their release,
partitioned nanorobots must temporarily observe a dense-traffic
protocol involving slower and lower-amplitude motions of motive
appendages or rotating elements in order to:
1. avoid mechanical conflict among such appendages or elements
between neighbors;
2. avoid potentially chaotic hydrodynamic interactions (Section
9.4.2.3); and
3. clear a sufficient interdevice distance to preclude significant
error in positional readings from the navigation grid (Section
8.3.3), due to spurious acoustic refraction and attenuation
effects if there is a large number density of nanorobots in the
vicinity.
9.4.5 Cytopenetration
Upon arriving at a target tissue cell, a cellular repair nanorobot
may require entry into the cytosol. The following is a necessarily
brief and incomplete discussion of several techniques and issues
involved in penetrating the plasma membrane, and by extension, in
penetrating other intracellular membrane structures including the
doubled-walled nuclear envelope and the multilayer outer membranes
of Gram-negative bacteria (Section 10.4.2.5). Micron-size siliceous
diatoms and “nanobacteria” with calcium shells2149,3096 and will
require additional penetrative mechanisms that are not described here.
This discussion also is applicable to the insertion of sensory
appendages or manipulatory devices through cell or organelle lipid
membranes.
9.4.5.1 Transmembrane Brachiation
One simple approach to cytopenetration is to insert a narrow
manipulator arm through the plasma membrane, perhaps assisted
by a wall-breaching tool tip analogous to the T4 lysozyme enzyme
that opens a hole in bacterial cell peptidoglycan walls,3150-3152 or
the T4 DNA-injection system that is specifically designed for lipid
bilayer penetration.1179,1180 The terminus of the manipulator firmly
attaches to an actin or microtubular fixed component of the interior
cytoskeleton, then retracts, towing the nanorobot through the lipid
bilayer surface. Metamorphic reshaping of the nanorobot aspect
minimizes the total number of noncovalent lipid bilayer bonds that
must be disturbed during transit. Cell surfaces tolerate forces up to
~1 nN per 100 nm2 before breaking, so a ~1 nN arm tip smaller
than 100 nm2 in cross section should be able to push itself through
the cellular plasma membrane and into the interior of the cell. As a
very crude estimate of the penetration energy required, taking the
membranolytic limit as 3 x 106 N/m2
, then a 1-micron long, 1-nm
Fig. 9.29. Schematic of metamorphic screw drive for cytopenetration.
322 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Fig. 9.31. Schematic of vesicle fusion for cytopenetration.
wide tear can be opened up by applying ~3000 pN of force through
a distance of ~10 nm (typical plasma membrane thickness) costing
~30,000 zJ of energy, a ~0.003 pW power demand during a ~10
millisec transit time at a ~100 micron/sec transit speed. It may also
be possible to reduce entry forces by inducing lipid bilayer membrane
demixing using a tangentially-applied electric field.1613
9.4.5.2 Metamorphic Screw Drive
A nanorobot with a hydrophobic (e.g., diamondoid) metamorphic
surface may locally reconfigure its prow in the shape of a screw
having two traveling raised ridges, with a thread width at least as
wide as the plasma membrane plus the plasma membrane skeleton
or cell cortex, perhaps 30-50 nm thick (Section 8.5.3.11). After the
screw has initially penetrated the surface and the first thread course
is locked in place (Section 9.4.5.1), the thread pattern may then be
translated toward the rear of the nanorobot, allowing the device to
screw itself into the cell’s interior (Fig. 9.29). A ~100 micron/sec
transit speed requires <0.001 pW for a 1 micron2 cross-section
nanorobot to overcome viscous drag (Section 9.4.2.4) and ~0.01
pW to operate a 100-nm wide section of metamorphic surface
assuming ~0.35 micron2 of surface dissipating ~0.03 pW/micron2
(Sections 5.3.1.4 and 5.3.6). Cell entry is completed in ~10 millisec.
9.4.5.3 Solvation Wave Drive
The lipid bilayer membrane is hydrophilic on the outermost and
innermost surfaces, and lipophilic in the interior (Fig. 8.37). Much
like the physical screw described in the previous Section, the hydrophilicity of the nanorobot exterior surface may also be manipulated
to produce a traveling helical solvation wave that establishes temporary
noncovalent bonds with elements of the plasma membrane, allowing
the nanorobot to pull itself through the lipid bilayer (Fig. 9.30). The
plasma membrane is typically 6-10 nm thick (Section 8.5.3.2). The
cholesterol-poor lipid membranes of the mitochondria and the
endoplasmic reticulum have a 2.5 nm inner hydrophobic region,
while cholesterol-rich lipid membranes like those of the plasma
membrane and the endosomes have a 3.1 nm wide hydrophobic
region.1113-1115 Each contact point may be envisioned as a
semaphore-like mechanism (Section 5.3.6) by which lipophilic or
hydrophilic moieties are rotated into an exposed position (facilitating
noncovalent bonding with a particular lipid bilayer phase), then
moved a short distance relative to the nanorobot body (transmitting
force to the nanorobot), then rotated back into a nonexposed position
(breaking the bond to the lipid membrane).
From Eqn. 9.73, a 1-micron nanorobot traveling at ~100
microns/sec must generate ~2 pN of motive force in order to overcome
the viscous resistance of plasmalike fluid at 310 K. Given a
single-lipid extraction force of Flipid ~ 1 pN (Section 9.4.3.1), ten
simultaneous contacts producing a total of 2 pN reduces applied
force per contact to a reasonably safe ~20% Flipid. Assuming 10
simultaneous contacts spaced around the nanorobot perimeter and
10 nm of available longitudinal travel for each bonded semaphore
mechanism, a 1-micron nanorobot requires ~1000 surface semaphores
in staggered configuration. Allowing ~300 nm2 per semaphore
presentation face (Section 5.3.6), the entire solvation wave drive
system occupies just 5% of nanorobot surface area. Breaking ~1000
noncovalent semaphore-membrane bonds, assuming ~100 zJ/bond
(Section 3.5.2), during a 10 millisec transit requires ~0.01 pW of
power; the same figure is obtained for 300,000 nm2 of semaphores
dissipating ~0.03 pW/micron2 (Section 5.3.6).Total power required
to overcome viscous resistance is ~0.0002 pW during the ~10 millisec
transit time (Section 9.4.2.4).
9.4.5.4 Vesicle Fusion and Endocytotic Entry
A nanorobot may also gain entry to a cell by releasing amphipathic
lipid molecules from its surface, which will self-assemble into a thin
lipid bilayer coat, enveloping the entire nanorobot. Natural
viruses1721 and synthetic carriers1722 use similar methods to convey
extracellular DNA across outer cell plasma membranes and nuclear
membranes. The materials comprising a 10-nm thick lipid bilayer
surrounding a spherical object ~1 micron in radius can be stored in
a ~0.1 micron3 internal tank, occupying only ~3% of total internal
device volume. The fusion of two distinct lipid bilayers is energetically
unfavorable in the absence of specialized proteins.1530 Thus after
approaching the target plasma membrane, the enveloped nanorobot
must emit specialized plasma membrane fusion proteins, known as
fusogens,1587,3658 similar to the sperm protein PH-30α−β that
allows sperm and egg to merge,1082 the HIV virus envelope protein
gp120-gp41 with a typical contact area of ~8 nm2
,
1531,1587 the
envelope glycoprotein H employed by the herpesvirsuses,3657 and
Fig. 9.30. Schematic of solvation wave drive for cytopenetration.
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 323
the hemagglutinin protein found on the surface of influenza
virus.1532 (Nonprotein fusogens also are well-known, including lipids
such as N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamines (NAPEs),3659 fatty acids
such as arachidonic acid,3660 carbohydrates such as polyethylene
glycol,3661 and simple solvents such as dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO).3662)The nanorobot lipid bilayer, now fusion active, can
join with the plasma membrane layer and unfold, bringing the
formerly fully enclosed nanorobot into direct sealed contact with the
cytosol with a negligible energy expenditure (Fig. 9.31). This process
will add 0.5%-1.0% new lipid, by volume, to the existing ~14-24
micron3 plasma membrane volume (Table 8.17) of a 20-micron
tissue cell. Added lipids that don’t exactly match the native lipids of
the cell might disrupt the normal protein/lipid membrane ratio and
modify membrane fluidity, possibly altering signal timing and other
cell behaviors. If this is a problem, nanorobots employing this entry
technique could be designed to reabsorb and recycle the foreign
lipid, once inside the cell.
Other means of cell entry, such as “induced uptake,” are well
known. Like bacterial invaders, a nanorobot may emit cytochemical
“entry mediator” signals (e.g., the outer wall membrane protein
invasin, in Yersinia bacteria) to induce the target cell to form an
endocytotic vacuole around the device and suck it into the interior
of the cell. A membrane fusion-type tool may subsequently be used
to escape from the resulting endosome. Macrophages ingest up to
~25% of their volume per hour,996 a volume equivalent to hundreds of
micron-sized nanorobots. Many bacteria1012,1561 and viruses1530,1533
gain entry to cells by this means, and phagocytosis is mechanically
similar. Both are initiated by ligand-receptor interactions that activate
host signaling, with the actin cytoskeleton providing the necessary
force to internalize the particle into a membrane-bound vacuole.1012
Invasive bacteria utilize two major types of induced uptake:
1. a “zipper” type mechanism involving direct contact between
bacterial ligands and cellular receptors that sequentially encircle
the organism (e.g., Yersinia, Listeria); and;
2. a “trigger” mechanism in which bacterial signals to the cell
induce dramatic plasma membrane ruffling and cytoskeletal
rearrangements resulting in macropinocytosis with virtually
passive entry of the bacterium (e.g., Salmonella, Shigella) into
the cell.1012,1561,3191
9.4.5.5 Cytosolic Leakage During Transit
If the nanorobot-membrane interface is not tight, some leakage
of material into or out of the cell (depending upon relative hydraulic
and osmotic pressures) may occur during nanodevice transit. For
example, from Eqn. 3.1 the Brownian diffusion distance during a
ttransit ~ 10 millisec transit time is ~3 microns for small molecules
like amino acids (MW ~ 100 daltons), ~1 micron for large protein
molecules (MW ~ 100,000 daltons). An annular leakage ring of
width hleak ~ 10 nm around the circumference of a nanorobot of
radius Rnano ~ 1 micron may pass Vleak ~ 2 π Rnano hleak vleak ttransit ~
0.006 micron3 of cytosolic fluid during each transit (~0.00008% of
cell volume), assuming vleak ~ 10 microns/sec for random hydrodynamic flows induced by thermal fluctuations inside a cell (Section
8.5.3.12). Alternatively, modeling the leak as a ring of Npipe = 2 π
Rnano / rtube = 1257 nanopipes each of radius rtube ~ hleak/2 and
length ltube ~ 10 nm, and taking ∆p ~ 0.001 atm for the interstitial/
cellular pressure differential (Section 4.9.1.2), then from Eqn. 9.25
the total leakage volume from the ring of nanopipes is Vleak ~ Npipe
VHP ttransit ~ 0.03 micron3 of cytosolic fluid during each transit, or
~0.0004% of cell volume. Leakage may be reduced by encouraging
a tighter seal during transit using a dynamic ring pattern of lipophilic
semaphores at the nanorobot surface (Section 9.4.5.3) that tracks
the device’s passage through the plasma membrane. In some cases
such as nerve cells, significant ionic leakage could produce depolarization and thus should be avoided.
9.4.5.6 Breach Sealing and Intrusiveness
Some cytopenetration techniques involve tearing the lipid
bilayer. This breach must be resealed after transit. A fractured lipid
membrane presents two “greasy” surfaces to water; it is thermodynamically favorable for these two cut surfaces to fuse together so as
to eliminate the unfavorable water-fat interface.27,2316 Such fusion
may be encouraged mechanically by the passing nanorobot (Section
9.4.4.3), although the edges of the tear will attempt to round off
and self-seal, without rejoining.
Nevertheless, it is not uncommon to observe rapid natural
resealing of plasma membranes with little loss of intracellular contents,
a useful property given the many transient plasma membrane
disruptions that commonly occur in cells that experience significant
mechanical stress, such as gut, skin, endothelium, and
muscle.1534,3665 In one experiment, tissue cell plasma membranes
were punctured using 2-3 micron diameter micropipettes and a 300
millisec transit (wounding) time, and the torn plasma membrane
spontaneously resealed in 10-30 sec with relatively little visible loss of
injected dye.1534 Exocytosis-based resealing3666-3668 of a microneedle
puncture through the fibroblast plasma membrane occurs in 5-10
sec,3667 but a second puncture at the same site heals faster than the
initial wound3668—at first wounding, the cell uses existing endocytotic
compartment to add membrane necessary for resealing, but Ca++ entry
at the first wound stimulates vesicle formation from the Golgi
apparatus, resulting in more rapid resealing of the second membrane
disruption.3668
Watertight breach sealing might even be possible for nanorobots
trailing narrow, untensioned tethers with lipophilic coatings,
although such tethers may cause other problems (Sections 6.4.3.6
and 7.3.3); 0.1-micron optical fiber tips have been poked through a
cellular plasma membrane to measure the pH of the
cytoplasm inside, in single cells and in single rat embryos, without
ill effect on these large cells.577 In small cells (2-15 micron diameter),
“stab” microinjection at high pressure (0.1-0.2 atm) is problematic
because the nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio is higher so the nucleus is
more likely to be damaged during the stab. In one experiment, less
than 5% of neutrophils survived the high-pressure stab intact, but a
low-pressure (~0.01 atm) injection through a lipid bridge produced
a ~100% survival rate.2346
How many nanorobots (or other pieces of exogenous matter)
can safely squeeze into a living cell? This question is addressed further
in Chapter 15, but an extremely conservative volumetric injection
limit is ~50-100 micron3 per tissue cell (0.5-1% of typical cell volume)
without any significant observed effect on cell viability1192—
equivalent to ~3-100 bloodborne nanorobots, depending upon
object size. Individual lymphocytes (~200 micron3
)
777 have also been
observed circulating for hours inside large living cells, with no evident
ill effect (Section 8.5.3.12).
In some nanorobotic system configurations and applications, it
may be useful to deploy smaller intracellular probes tethered to larger
extracellular command centers. For example, axonal “cleanout” could
be an important anti-aging activity, given the evidence that axonal
transport slows with age presumably due to debris accumulation or
a decline in energy supplies; yet full-size nanorobots might not
conveniently fit inside some neural axons. Transmembrane tethers
324 Nanomedicine • Volume I
(tipped with relatively small unfurlable mechanisms) may be passed
into the cell’s interior by threading them through an anchored
transmembrane sleeve device. Fluid leakage between tether and inner
sleeve wall, either into or out of the cytosol, can be minimized if
both surfaces are hydrophobic. There are, of course, many important
drawbacks to the use of tethered systems generally (Sections 6.4.3.6
and 7.3.3).
9.4.5.7 Nuclear Membrane Penetration
Most of the methods proposed for plasma membrane penetration
can also be applied to the nuclear membrane, with several important
differences. First, the entry procedure should proceed at a much
slower velocity, to preclude any possibility of damaging the chromatin
(Section 8.5.4.7). Second, chromatin is attached to the nuclear cortex
away from the nuclear pores, and also in specific chromosomal
territories, so special care must be taken to avoid disturbing these
configurations. Third, the region to be traversed is much deeper—
two lipid bilayer membranes separated by a perinuclear space, and
lined on the nucleoplasmic side by a nuclear cortex of varying width
(Fig. 8.46)—which may require a somewhat different design than
systems used for single-membrane bilayer penetration.
9.4.6 In Cyto Locomotion
Once inside a cell, a motile nanorobot must navigate a cluttered
and highly viscous cytomatrix-rich environment (Section 8.5.3).
(When microscopic iron particles are introduced into the cytoplasm,
they move erratically (rather than smoothly) under the influence of
external magnetic fields.938) Any of the methods described for
cytoambulation (Section 9.4.3), histonatation (Section 9.4.4), or
cytopenetration (Section 9.4.5) may also be employed in modified
form within the cell. From Eqn. 9.65 and the data in Table 9.4, and
assuming a top speed of v ~ 10 microns/sec (Section 9.4.4.2), then
the Reynolds number of an L ~ 1 micron object inside a red blood
cell (a nucleus-free floppy bag filled with hemoglobin solution) is
NR ~ 10-6. For a nanorobot inside a free leukocyte, NR ~ 10-9;
inside an E. coli bacterium, NR ~ 10-11, taking the higher viscosity
into account.
There are many natural transport mechanisms inside
cytomatrix-rich cells which may serve as analogs for in cyto
nanorobot locomotion. For example, vesicles and granules ~100 nm
in diameter or larger are carried at a peak speed of up to
~2 microns/sec (although mean unloaded kinesin motor speed is
usually 0.5-0.8 microns/sec) on the back of a 60-nm kinesin transport
molecule (Fig. 9.32) that takes 8-nm ATP-powered steps along
microtubule tracks running throughout the cell1535,1536,3202-3204 with
a stall force of 5-7 pN;3201,3202 typically kinesin takes ~100 steps
along a microtubule, then lets go. Nanorobots could be designed to
brachiate along these tracks as well. Inside giant amoebas, mitochondria measuring 1-3 microns in length are carried along microtubules at speeds up to 10 microns/sec,453 and the pseudopods of
fibroblasts (and amoebas) can also extend at ~10 microns/sec.1252
Faster speeds may be possible for well-designed nanorobots, but an
upper limit of ~10 microns/sec through fluid-rich intracellular clear
channels seems reasonably conservative.
It is well-known that several pathogenic bacterial species, once
free in the cytoplasm of a human cell, propel themselves through
the cytosol using a continuous actin polymerization process that
takes place at one pole of the bacterium.1012 Actin assembly is
visible as a tail of polymerized F-actin that remains stationary in
the cytosol while the bacterium moves ahead. The polymerizing
tail rectifies the random thermal motions of the bacterium, preventing it from diffusing backwards while permitting forward
diffusion; thus the tail doesn’t actually “push” the bacterium forward.1203
Actin-based motility is mediated by a single bacterial protein—
ActA (610 amino acids) in Listeria and IcsA/VirG (120,000
daltons) in Shigella—localized in the polar regions of the bacterium.1012
Actin microfilaments (and tubulin) typically self-assemble at
~0.1-1 micron/sec;942 actin polymerization gives a stall force of
~10 pN per fiber, sufficient to drive a 1-micron object at ~1.5
micron/sec against a ~1 pN load in free fluid cytoplasm.1203 This
probably defines the top speed for actin-based bacterial mobility.
To progress through dense cytomatrical regions, motile
nanorobots of similar size to bacteria must cut or detach
cross-bridged cytoskeletal elements lying across the path ahead, then
attempt to reattach or reconstruct those elements after the nanorobot
has passed through the breach, because these elements lack sufficient
elasticity (and grid sizes are too small) to be pushed completely out
of the way. Such cytoskeletal elements will most commonly include
intermediate filaments and actin-based microfilaments. This procedure
is crudely analogous to the process employed by fibroblasts transiting
the ECM during wound repair. Fibroblast movement into
cross-linked fibrin blood clots or tightly woven ECM requires an
active proteolytic system that cleaves a pathway for migration; known
enzymes serving this purpose include plasminogen activator,
interstitial collagenase (MMP-1), the 72 kilodalton gelatinase A
(MMP-2), and stromelysin (MMP-3).1537
For an average filament grid size of Lgrid ~ 100 nm for the cortical
actin cytogel1203 and a nanorobot of radius Rnano ~ 1 micron, a
minimum of two long diagonal cuts each of length 2 Rnano (simplistically, making four triangular flaps) to allow passage requires Ncut =
4 Rnano / Lgrid = 40 transected grid segments in order to advance a
distance Lgrid, or νcut = 4 Rnano vnano / Lgrid2 = 400 cuts (or reattachments) per second at vnano ~ 1 micron/sec. This compares favorably
Fig. 9.32. Vesicle carried along microtubule track by kinesin transport
molecule (schematic only, modified from Travis1535).
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 325
with the νbrach ~ 500 Hz estimated earlier for a manipulator arm used
for ECM brachiation, where chemopositional validation is required
at every step (Section 9.4.4.2), and is well below the νdetach ~ 10
KHz estimated for intercellular passage where such validation is
not required (Section 9.4.4.3). An important additional design issue
for in cyto brachiation systems is to minimize accidental mechanical
signal transduction into the nucleus, which may trigger unwanted
cytological responses.
Power requirements for intracellular mobility are typically modest
but vary widely, depending mainly upon velocity, the type of cell,
and the path chosen. In highly fluidic clear channels, viscosity should
more closely resemble that of the red cell interior (η ~ 10-2 kg/
m-sec), so from Eqn. 9.74 and taking Rnano = 1 micron and vnano
~ 10 microns/sec, then Pnano/e% ~ (0.00002 pW)/e% for pure
cytonatation. Nanorobots traversing pathways through filament-rich
regions of the cell will experience much higher effective viscosities,
on the order of η ~ 10-1000 kg/m-sec (Table 9.4), but will also
travel more slowly (e.g., vnano ~ 1 micron/sec), giving a viscous
resistance power requirement for the nanorobot body of Pnano/e% ~
(0.0002-0.02 pW)/e%, from Eqn. 9.74. A telescoping manipulator
arm measuring 500 nm in length, performing the filament cuts and
joins at νcut ~ νjoin ~ 400 Hz with ~2.5 microns of tool-tip travel per
cycle, moves at a tip speed of ~1 mm/sec, producing ~0.025 pW of
mechanical losses under no-load conditions (Section 9.3.1.4); there
are at least two operational arms, one fore and one (or more) aft.
Multiple arms may be needed in a dense filament network. Another
~0.025 pW is required to overcome the viscous resistance against
each moving arm (using Eqn. 9.75), giving a total power cost of
0.1-0.3 pW for transfilamentary intracellular locomotion at vnano ~
1 micron/sec assuming locomotive efficiency e% = 0.10 (10%).
Some of the difficulties and limitations of in nucleo locomotion
have already been mentioned in Sections 8.5.4.7 and 9.4.5.7. The
most important constraint is to observe a maximum speed limit
that avoids mechanical chromatin damage. Although a 500
kilodalton protein would diffuse from one side of a 5-8 micron
nucleus to the other in only ~5-6 sec (~1 micron/sec average), normal
chromosomal movements during interphase have been estimated
by observing the motions of individual centromeres, typically
0.002-0.003 microns/sec,1529 and peak chromosome transport
speeds during mitosis are ~0.1 micron/sec.1463 A strict in nucleo
speed limit of ~0.1 micron/sec on all nanorobot bodies and most
exposed appendages appears prudent. A force limit of ~50 pN for
intranuclear locomotion should also be observed (Section 8.5.4.7)—
a 1-micron nanorobot picking its way through a filament-rich
medium of net viscosity ~10 kg/m-sec requires the application of
~20 pN to overcome viscous drag at a travel speed of ~0.1 micron/sec.
9.4.7 Cytocarriage
The commandeering of natural motile cells by medical
nanorobots, known as cytocarriage, offers an alternative mode of in
vivo transport. During cytocarriage, one or more medical nanorobots
may enter a motile cell, ride or steer the cell to a desired destination
inside the human body, then vacate the cell upon arrival. The
discussion here is a necessarily brief overview of the objectives of
cytocarriage (Section 9.4.7.1), cytovehicle selection (Section 9.4.7.2),
initiating cytocarriage (Section 9.4.7.3), steering and control during
the journey (Section 9.4.7.4), cytocarriage navigation and sensing
(Section 9.4.7.5) and cytovehicular behavioral control (Section
9.4.7.6).
9.4.7.1 Objectives of Cytocarriage
One of the most important utilities of cytocarriage is the “cell
herding” function.9 Nanorobots can marshall significant resources
drawn from the body’s natural immune and wound repair systems,
and redirect them to particular sites that are in urgent need of
assistance. In this role, medical nanorobots may act as immune
system or wound repair homeostatic accelerants, regardless of the
nanorobots’ own additional inherent reparative functions, which
may be considerable. Nanorobots may also seize control of pathogen
and parasite mobility systems, then guide them to natural disposal
sites within the body.
While nanorobot control of the natural motility apparatus might
slightly improve its performance, as a practical matter the maximum
speed of cytovehicles being driven through tissues is probably limited
to near the maximum observed natural speeds of in vivo progression of
uncontrolled cells (e.g., ~1-10 microns/sec). This will normally be
considerably slower than the maximum transtissue speeds available
to self-propelled medical nanodevices (e.g., 100-1000 microns/sec).
Also, cytocarriage is usually energetically inefficient compared to
self-propelled medical nanorobots. However, in some circumstances
a strategy of cytocarriage may avoid the need to include certain
propulsive mechanisms in the nanorobot design for some segments
of the mission pathway, thus reducing nanodevice design complexity
and freeing up scarce onboard storage volume for additional
consumables or mission-critical machinery. Cytovehicles (e.g., leukocytes) engineered to display organ-specific tissue homing could be
preloaded with passenger nanorobots prior to injection into the
patient. Once injected, the nanorobots would be delivered to the
intended destination with acceptable reliability. Of course,
surface-placed antigen semaphores (Section 5.3.6) may directly confer
a similar homing ability on bloodborne nanorobots, with equal or
superior reliability.
Due to the small size of most readily available cytovehicles,
conservatively only one or at most a few nanorobots may be able to
safely enter and occupy the interior of each commandeered motile
cell without triggering unwanted cellular responses (Chapter 15).
However, additional nanorobot passengers may adhere to the exterior
of the plasma membrane of the cytovehicle (after disabling certain
natural haptotactic reactivities), or may be towed by the motile cell,
allowing the motile cell to serve as a “pack animal” or “biological
tractor.” Interestingly, protozoa called mixotrichs that are present
in the termite gut are propelled by several thousand bacterial spirochetes attached to the protozoan as obligate symbiotes;2025-2027
S. Vogel observes that “the protozoa have adopted bacteria as
engines the way a human might use a team of horses.”2022
Even heavily burdened cytovehicles operate at very low Reynolds
numbers (Section 9.4.2.1), so the total mass of passengers (Mpass,
determining the inertial load) is relatively unimportant compared
to the total surface area of the passengers (Apass, determining the
viscous load); Mpass ~ Npass (the number of passengers per cell), but
Apass ~ Npass
2/3 for efficiently packed passengers. Given a towing
strength of 165 nN for the human fibroblast,1461 a properly harnessed
single fibroblast cell traversing interstitial fluid at a speed of 10
microns/sec can in theory tow behind it a 20-micron wide,
1000-micron long cylindrically-packed aggregate of Npass ~ 300,000
1-micron3 nanorobot passengers with a towing force of only FnanoP
= 0.01 nN (Eqn. 9.75). (A fibroblast pulling 165 nN at 10
microns/sec consumes ~2 pW of power.)
9.4.7.2 Cytovehicle Selection
Which motile human cells may be the most appropriate
cytovehicles? Since almost all cells exhibit migratory behavior at the
326 Nanomedicine • Volume I
embryonic stages of development, in theory all cells can probably
be mobilized, given access to the nuclear chromatin and the ability
to manipulate it (Chapter 20). However, it is a safer and simpler
matter to choose cells which are exclusively or at least facultatively
motile in the human adult. The obvious candidates include white
cells (e.g., neutrophils, monocytes, dendritic cells, eosinophils,
basophils), lymphocytes (up to ~0.5 microns/sec848), macrophages,
and fibroblasts—the speediest and most widely distributed
cytovehicles—as well as Kupffer cells, osteoblasts and osteoclasts,
endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, sperm cells, malignant
tumor cells (after safing), neuronal cells, and some migratory epithelial
(e.g., Langerhans’ cells) and mesenchymal cells. Motions analogous
to crawling transform blood platelets from smooth disks into spiny
spheres to plug vascular leaks after injury.1564 Most bacteria are too
small for whole-device entry, although their motility could be
controlled by spoofing the external chemosensors, perhaps making
them useful for piggybacking or towing (Section 9.4.7.1), or for
steering to disposal sites. Other possibilities include parasites such
as Entamoeba histolytica (found in the gut during amoebic dysentery,
the liver during hepatic amebiasis, the bloodstream, and elsewhere),
Giardia lamblia (an intestinal parasite), Plasmodium (a bloodstream
parasite producing malaria), and so forth.
Erythrocytes are a special case. Though not motile, red blood
cells are plentiful in the body, flow to within ~50 microns of virtually
every tissue cell in the body, and have a tough, floppy outer plasma
membrane. Experimentalists often replace the hemoglobin solution
of red cells with an isotonic aqueous solution, producing “ghost
cells” that mechanically behave much like the original cells minus
the respiratory functions. In theory, nanorobots could enter an
erythrocyte ghost cell and erect an artificial internal cytoskeleton
to control cell shape, rotation, and possibly simulate amoeboid
motions. However, naturally motile cells such as white cells already
possess hardwired programs for creeping, diapedesis, object engulfment,
etc. that can be triggered mechanically or biochemically with a
minimum of effort (Section 9.4.7.6), hence these cells are much
more attractive cytovehicles.
Passive cytocarriage is widely practiced in the microscopic world.
Dengue-2 virus enters macrophages and B lymphocytes, hitching a
ride;3082 bacteria stably associated with human cells (e.g., E. coli in
the intestinal mucosa) are well known. Larger microbes such as the
tuberculosis bacterium also employ opportunistic cytocarriage.1558
These bacteria are specially adapted to recognize and lock on to the
large macrophages distributed throughout pulmonary tissue, and
thento induce these cells to ingest them. Once inside the macrophages, the
microbes get a free ride into the blood or the lymphatic system,
enabling them to reach destinations all over the human body.384
9.4.7.3 Cytocarriage Initiation
There are ~7000 leukocytes/mm3 in adult human blood (Appendix
B) with a mean separation of ~50 microns, providing numerous
and readily-available cytovehicles. A white cell that is cytoambulating
at ~10 microns/sec moves only ~0.02 micron during the ~2 millisec
required to establish identity (Section 8.5.2.2), and another ~0.1
micron during the ~10 millisec required for the piloting nanorobot
to penetrate the plasma membrane (Section 9.4.5). Nevertheless, it
may be desirable to temporarily halt the progression of the
cytovehicle during the period in which nanorobot control is being
established. This is readily accomplished by biochemical means. For
example, when leukocytes are placed in an isotonic solution containing EDTA, active spontaneous movement stops and the cells
respond passively to external loads.362 Excess zinc immobilizes
macrophages.359 Integrins respond to intracellular messages, altering
both selectivity and binding strength: the α2β1 integrin can be
inactive, a receptor for collagen, or a receptor for both collagen and
laminin, depending on the type of cell that produces it and the
signals received from inside the cell.1511
Once inside a 10-micron diameter leukocyte, a nanorobot traveling
at ~1 micron/sec may require ~5 sec to migrate to an appropriate
location near the center of the cell and establish control. Leukocyte
towing harnesses may be quite simple in design but must be nondestructive. A required towing force of 0.01 nN (Section 9.4.7.1)
requires only ~5 noncovalent bonds (breaking strength ~2 pN/bond;
Section 9.4.4.2) to the glycocalyx or plasma membrane; a single
100 nm2 footpad (Section 9.4.3.3) can provide up to 0.3 nN of
harness anchoring force.
9.4.7.4 Steering and Control
A complete understanding of motile cell mobility biological control
systems is not yet available. However, present knowledge1564 is
sufficient to support the conclusion that virtually complete command
of cellular mobility systems by in cyto medical nanorobots should
be feasible. Such control may be effected by either biochemical or
mechanical means.
The “amoeboid” movement (Section 9.4.3.7) of leukocytes and
fibroblasts relies primarily upon temporary extensions of the cell
surface rather than major movements of cytoplasm. These temporary
extensions, such as the small filopodia and the larger lamellipodia,
are surface evaginations involving bundles of actin filaments or
microtubules* in parallel array, often comprising a large fraction of
the total surface area of the cell. Motion is made possible by an
internal system of bracing which is built or modified according to
the needs of the cell. Immediately below the plasma membrane is a
region of densely packed and interconnected actin microfilaments
called the cell cortex (Section 8.5.3.11). A leukocyte moves by
breaking down actin filaments and rebuilding them in the proper
orientation, pushing the cell in a new direction and allowing the
posterior regions to retract.312
Fiber bundles isolated by microlaser surgery from a glycerinated
fibroblast have been shown to contract with the addition of ATP.938
Focal attachments between substrate and cell are modulated both
by external chemotactic gradients on the substrate and by internal
biochemical regulatory pathways (second messenger molecules;
Section 7.4.5.1); similar signal transduction pathways control the
polymerization and disassembly of filaments and microtubules
comprising the podial extensions. Regulatory proteins that bind
actin monomers and filaments, some of which function in response
to transmembrane signaling, include ADF, adseverin, caldesmon,
cap Z, cap 100, cofilin, gelsolin, MCP, phospholipase C-γ, profilin,
and severin.1564 Manipulation of the internal concentrations and
spatial distributions of appropriate intracellular messenger molecules
and ATP should permit in cyto medical nanorobots to command
these biochemical pathways and to regulate localized polymerization
processes,1943 thus controlling the speed and direction of motile
cell locomotion.
* Treadmilling and dynamic instability control microtubule length in vivo.1560
** PDGF concentration in human serum is 50 ng/cm3 (Appendix B); optimum concentration is 1-20 ng/cm3
 ,3153 or ~1 molecule/micron3
, for chemotactic response of neutrophils
and monocytes during wound repair (Chapter 24). Fibroblasts need the higher concentration in this range (~20 ng/cm3
); PDGF stimulates a full mitogenic response.1554
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 327
As another example of an intracellular mediator system that may
be subject to direct nanorobotic control, consider the Ras superfamily
of small guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases). One member of this
superfamily, known as Rho, can be activated by the addition of
extracellular ligands (such as lysophosphatidic acid), leading to the
assembly of contractile actin-myosin filaments (stress fibers) and
associated focal adhesion complexes.1538 Rho acts as a molecular
switch to control a signal transduction pathway linking plasma
membrane receptors to the cytoskeleton.1539 Rac, another member
of the Rho subfamily, can be activated by a distinct set of agonists
such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)** or insulin, leading
to the assembly of a meshwork of actin filaments at the cell periphery
to produce lamellipodia and plasma membrane ruffles.1540 Activation
of Cdc42, another Rho subfamily member, induces actin-rich
filopodial surface protrusions that are also associated with distinct
integrin-based adhesion complexes.1541,1542 There is significant
cross-talk between GTPases of the Ras and Rho subfamilies—Ras
can activate Rac (thus Ras induces lamellipodia), Cdc42 activates
Rac (thus associating filopodial and lamellipodial formation), and
Rac can activate Rho.
1540,1541 Members of the Rho GTPase family
appear to be key regulatory molecules linking surface receptors to the
organization of the actin cytoskeleton.1539 By 1998, about 10
GTPase-activating proteins and 3 guanine nucleotide dissociation
inhibitors (both potential down-regulators of GTPase activity), and at
least 20 cellular effector targets with relevant protein-protein interaction domains, had been described.1539 Local cytoplasmic injections or
extractions of nanomolar concentrations of these second-messenger
substances should permit full control of cytovehicular direction and
speed.
Less subtle biochemical methods of cytoskeletal manipulation
are also available to nanorobotic pilots. For example, the drugs
colchicine and taxol disrupt microtubule function in distinctly
different ways. Colchicine binds to tubulin, strongly inhibiting its
further assembly into microtubules and fostering the disassembly
of existing microtubules;939 two other alkaloids, vinblastine and
vincristine, also reversibly inhibit microtubule assembly.936
(Microtubules are always losing and reacquiring tubulin dimers, and
these three drugs prevent reassembly, so eventually the tubules would
disappear entirely.) Colchicine diminishes neutrophil migration into
inflammatory foci.936 By contrast, taxol binds tightly to microtubules,
stabilizing them and causing much of the free tubulin in the cell to
assemble into microtubules.939 Similarly, the drug phalloidin (e.g.,
~5 nanomoles/cm3
)
1557 blocks the depolymerization of actin, thereby
stabilizing microfilaments, whereas cytochalasin B inhibits the
polymerization of actin microfilaments.939 Drug molecule diffusion
time over ~1 micron ranges is ~1 millisec, consistent with ~KHz
cycling. S. Smith notes that the use of oncogene products like members
of the Ras supergene family, coupled with cytotoxins and genotoxins
like phalloidin and vinblastine for steering, could transform a leukocyte. The risk of generating a leukemia must be avoided, perhaps by
implanting a timed self-destruct signal in the cytovehicle before
initiating cytocarriage.
Cytovehicles may also be piloted by palpating the cytoskeleton
mechanically—for instance, by applying tension to selected parts
of the cytoskeleton using nanorobot manipulators. ECM-mediated
mechanical forces can pull cells into square and rectangular shapes
with sharp 90˚ corners.718,1555 Mechanical manipulation may also
be needed to drive cells into places they will not normally go. For
instance, cells parked on experimentally-created micropatterned
adhesive islands surrounded by nonadhesive (PEG-coated) boundaries
cannot be induced to step off the islands even when stimulated with
high concentrations of soluble growth factors.1555 Mechanical signals
are transduced into biochemical signals via mechanosensory plasma
membrane channels1506 and by other means.
How fast can cytovehicles be driven? Even using supranormal
concentrations of biochemical control molecules combined with
close placement to active sites in order to minimize diffusion time
delays, a purely biochemically-mediated control system is probably
limited to the maximum speeds of actin polymerization or osmotic
inflation, or ~1-10 microns/sec. However, purely mechanical
cytovehicular control systems can be cycled at much higher speeds,
at least in tension. Individual actin microfilaments will tolerate a
maximum tensile stress of ~108 pN (Section 8.5.3.11); the binding
force between cytoskeleton and cell cortex at focal adhesions is of
similar magnitude. Let us assume that the piloting nanorobot
manipulates just a single fiber to drive each ~1 micron diameter
lamellipodium, and that this single fiber is not driven beyond 10%
of its theoretical failure strength, a very conservative limit. Using
Eqn. 9.73 to crudely approximate the viscous drag force on the
protuberance as it moves through interstitial fluid, each
lamellipodium can be flexed at speeds up to ~500 micron/sec.
Manipulating more fibers adds to the margin of safety. (Cyclosis in
mature plant cells such as Nitella and Chara produces circular
motions of some cell components as fast as 100 microns/sec.938)
Similar manipulation of the much stronger intermediate fiber (IF)
cytoskeleton (Section 8.5.3.11) would in theory permit speeds up
to ~0.1 m/sec, but such aggressive forces might rip the IF fibers
loose from their intracellular moorings. Another potential concern
is that rapid cycling will stimulate unwanted peripheral actin
polymerization or depolymerization reactions unless they are
actively suppressed.
Electric fields may also drive leukocyte motion (Section 4.9.3.1).
For example, a mild electric current induces lymphocytes to travel
in the same direction of the current (“electrotaxis”) at speeds up to
~0.3 microns/sec.848 Small electric gradients have been shown
experimentally to stimulate leukocyte diapedesis (Section 4.9.3.1),690
though multiple nanorobots would probably be required to generate
the necessary currents.
9.4.7.5 Navigation and Sensing
The nanorobotic pilot can directly access the high-resolution
extracellular acoustic navigational grid (if such has been installed
in the patient; Section 8.3.3) to establish absolute position and
orientation of the cytovehicle within the human body, or may
employ alternative positional or functional navigational cues as
may be provided by the attending physician (Chapter 8).
Chemosensory data (including tissue- and cell-recognition events)
reaching the exterior surface of the piloted cell trigger natural internal
biochemical cascades which are readily monitored and interpreted
by in cyto nanorobots. Extracellular and ECM-related
mechanosensory data and plasma membrane stretch sensor data
produce similar recognizable internal biochemical and
cytomechanical effects.
Eavesdropping on natural chemotactic signals is particularly
effective. For instance, after leaving the blood vessels, neutrophils
recognize biochemicals produced by bacteria and migrate toward a
rising concentration. Laboratory demonstrations of neutrophil
chemotaxis often use a concentration gradient of fMLP (n-formyl
methionine-leucine-phenylalanine), a peptide chain produced by
some bacteria, at ~0.1 nanomole/cm3
.
1554 Chemotaxis also occurs
among human T-lymphocytes in the presence of a 0.01-1 picomole/
cm3
 gradient of Met-enkephalin or β-endorphin.1512 Chemotactic
cytokines for leukocytes, macrophages, and fibroblasts—many of
which are tissue-specific (and thus additionally serve as an aid to
328 Nanomedicine • Volume I
navigation) or condition-specific (e.g., inflammation)—are
well-studied.767,1516,1565-1570
Similarly, E. coli has chemosensory receptors (three different transmembrane methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins or MCPs531
located mostly in clusters at one pole of the cell.1544 At least two
cytoplasmic signaling proteins, CheA and CheW, are known to
interact with chemosensors in vitro.1544,1545 Various intracellular
mediator protein molecules convey chemoreceptor signals by diffusion
(across one cell length in ~200 millisec)1546 to the flagellar motors,
which drive the bacterium forward in 20-40 micron/sec bursts.437
MCPs respond to attractants and repellants in the extracellular
environment. All these signals can be detected in cyto by an eavesdropping “piggybacking” nanorobotic pilot equipped with
appropriate (membrane-penetrating) cytoplasmic chemosensors.
The nanorobotic pilot may also deploy loosely-tethered
nanosensor remotes and insert them into the cytovehicle’s plasma
membrane, during or after cytopenetration. These nanosensors may
employ simple mechanical plasma membrane locking (Section
9.4.5.2) or a stationary solvation wave pattern (Section 9.4.5.3) to
straddle the plasma membrane, mimicking natural transmembrane
integral proteins (Fig. 8.37), or could anchor one end of their transmembrane structure to the underlying cellular cortex. Such sensors
could gather whatever extracellular thermal, mechanical, acoustic,
chemical, or electromagnetic data might be required by the pilot
for proper navigation and steering. The nanosensors are retrieved
when the nanorobotic pilot exits the cytovehicle at the destination.
When macrophages and other leukocytic cells become infected,
they express B7 (a co-stimulator molecule) on their plasma membrane
surface which can be recognized by a T-cell CD28 receptor protein,
triggering an immunologic response in the presence of
surface-displayed antigen.1556 Nanorobotic pilots should inspect the
cell surface of all prospective cytovehicles for B7 and similar pathogenic flags prior to cytopenetration, so as not to unintentionally choose
an infected cell for cytocarriage which could then spread the infection
or become subject to immunosystem attack. If the cell subsequently
becomes infected and begins expressing B7 or other warning substances
during the journey, the nanorobotic pilot should abort the mission
and steer the cytovehicle to a nearby disposal site, or implement
immediate cytotherapeutic measures. Failing this, the pilot should
abandon the vehicle at once.
9.4.7.6 Cytovehicular Behavioral Control
Besides simple steering and chemotaxis, many stereotypical cell
behaviors may be triggered biochemically as well. Diapedesis, ECM
brachiation with a preference for a particular ECM ligand, particle
engulfment, transitions between migratory and profibrotic phenotypes in fibroblasts,1537 cell volume and shape changes, cell cycling
and growth, and epithelial-mesenchymal transformations1547 may
be initiated, amplified, or suppressed by regulating the flows and
distributions of various cytoplasmic signal molecules which may
include proteins or nonproteins (such as Ca++ or GTP).
Motility-stimulating factors such as autocrine stimulating factor1548
and migration stimulating factor1549 are produced by fibroblasts
and act in an autocrine (Section 7.4.5.1) fashion. Leukocytes keep
rolling over vascular endothelium until a neutrophil activator (e.g.,
a selectin) is encountered, whereupon they stick tightly and
undergo the shape change characteristic of neutrophil diapedesis978—
a process that nanorobotic pilots should be able to monitor and
control. Mammary epithelial cells receive mechanical signals from
the ECM via a tyrosine kinase (biochemical) signal transduction
pathway through the β1 integrin receptor leading to the activation
of elements in the promoter region of the β-casein gene.1550 Release
of Sr++ inside cytolytic T lymphocytes induces degranulation—the
emission of cytotoxic granules containing granulysin that can
inhibit growth in a broad spectrum of pathogens, including bacteria,
fungi, and parasites, and can directly kill the tuberculosis bacterium.2165
Most integrins bind to their ECM ligands via the tripeptide RGD
(Arg-Gly-Asp), so the nanorobotic pilot can release RGD as an
antagonist to moderate or to prevent cell-ECM interactions.1551
Alternatively, ECM-integrin binding can be enhanced by specific
cytoplasmic molecules such as the cell adhesion regulator (CAR), a
myristoylated protein that can connect the plasma membrane to
the cytoskeleton.1552 ECM molecules interact with their receptors
at the cell surface, transmitting signals directly or indirectly to second
messengers which in turn unravel a cascade of events leading to the
coordinated expression of a variety of genes involved in cell adhesion
and release, migration, proliferation, differentiation, and death.1553
By intercepting and regulating specific second messenger pathways,
or by artificially triggering them mechanically, the pilot can exercise
considerable control over cell behavior.
The nanorobotic pilot must inhibit certain natural cell behaviors
that might distract the cytovehicle from its imposed mission. For
example, emission of Rap1-GTP protein into the cytoplasm of a
Jurkat T cell renders the cell anergic (unresponsive) and incapable
of transcribing the gene encoding interleukin-2 when stimulated
with antigen.1562 Intracellular kinesin molecular motors (Fig. 9.32)
are inhibited by adociasulfate-2 (AS-2; MW = 738 daltons), a molecule
that targets the kinesin motor domain.1563 Activated macrophages
themselves secrete chemoattractant factors that may draw a crowd
of leukocytes, fibroblasts, and other macrophages toward the flight
path, impeding mobility and possibly triggering a natural granulomatous (encapsulation) reaction. These processes may be desirable
to stimulate at the destination, but they should be suppressed en route.
Unwanted cytovehicular responses due to nanorobot intrusion
should also be suppressed, much as pathogens such as M. tuberculosis
resist or inhibit oxidative killing, attack by defensins,
phagosome-lysosome fusion, and formation of the electron-transparent
zone that impairs lysosomal enzyme diffusion, thus ensuring their
survival inside macrophages for long periods of time.1558,1559
Cell behavior can also be mechanically regulated by altering cell
shape, because cells can detect when a mechanical strain is placed
upon them.942,1020 In one experiment, stretching a fibroblast by
1% for 180 sec triggered large-scale changes in cell shape, including
retraction of pseudopods and cell elongation.1557 Other experiments
show that very flat cells, with their cytoskeletons stretched, sense
that more cells are needed to cover the surrounding substrate (as in
wound repair) and that cell division is needed. A rounded shape
indicates that too many cells are competing for space on the matrix
and that cells may be excessively proliferating; some must die to
prevent tumor formation. Normal tissue function is established and
maintained between these two extremes.1021 Certain mechanical
stresses on cells, such as might be generated by a nanorobotic pilot
inside the cytovehicle or dense cytovehicular traffic near the destination, may trigger unwanted reactions that should be avoided.
9.5 Ex Vivo Locomotion
In this final Section of Chapter 9, our attention turns to
locomotion across, through, and around the external surfaces of
the human body. The most important of such surfaces are the teeth
(Section 9.5.1) and the skin (Section 9.5.2). Another important
consideration is aerial locomotion near the human body (Section
9.5.3). These discussions are necessarily incomplete; more com-
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 329
prehensive treatments are beyond the scope of this introductory
text.
9.5.1 Dental Walking
The exposed surfaces of natural dentition consist of a ~500
micron thick layer of enamel coating the exposed crown of each
tooth inside the mouth. Enamel is a composite structure containing
~96% inorganic material similar to hydroxyapatite, a dense bone
mineral, embedded in an organic matrix of glycoprotein and a
keratin-like protein. The mineral forms crystallites oriented into
hexagonal cylinders with a horseshoe-shaped cross-section wrapping
around the dentin, forming enamel prisms ~5 microns in diameter
stacked in parallel congeries.646,854,1571These prismatic columns are
directed vertically at the summit of the crown and horizontally along
the sides of the tooth, pursuing a generally wavy course. There are
no nutritive channels permeating the enamel and leading into the
dentinal layer below, although dentinal tubules (nutritive channels)
do extend from the pulp chamber into the dentin which may get
extremely close to the occlusal (enamel) surface of the tooth, and
may be exposed by receding gums. However, ~0.4-micron-wide
fissures separating enamel prisms are filled with an interprismatic
substance of much higher organic content. The entire enamel
surface is pockmarked by numerous micropores of irregular but
generally oval shape, ranging from 0.1-2 microns (average ~0.5
micron) in diameter and spaced ~1-2 microns apart. Thus a
dental-walking micron-size nanorobot encounters a spongelike
topography with holes and fissures comparable in size to the
nanorobot diameter, and with gently rolling hills ~2 device diameters
in height and ~5 diameters across. (There is also a thin layer of
salivary proteins coating the tooth enamel surface.)3669,3670
Nanorobots may traverse tooth enamel using ambulatory techniques
previously described in other contexts (Section 9.4), including legged
walking, rolling, or amoeboid locomotion using footpads for
anchorage. Teeth may be clenched with a force up to 300-500
N,1296,3671-3673 although forces of ~50 N are more common during
normal mastication of soft foods. Assuming ~1 cm2 of dental contact
surface, shear forces at that surface during chewing or clenching are
0.5-5 x 106 N/m2
, close to the limit for noncovalent anchorage
(Section 9.4.3.3). Nanorobots seeking further refuge from shear forces
may congregate in the valleys between enamel prisms or can seat
themselves in the irregular micropores. E. Reifman notes that ~90%
of U.S. adults have multiple occlusal surface restorations composed of
many different materials such as resin composites of various hardness
coefficients, porcelain or gold crowns, amalgam fillings, composites,
and the relatively newer but very popular glass polymer crowns,
representing a substantial percentage of all exposed dental surfaces
with which oral nanodevices must cope; yield strength of these
materials at 0.1% strain deformation typically ranges from
110-10,000 atm.3271
Are the forces of dental grinding sufficient to crush medical
nanodevices? Tests of sized jeweler’s grinding powders by the author
confirm that even irregularly-shaped diamondoid particles ~3
microns and smaller apparently roll smoothly out of the way when
ground between the teeth, whereas particles larger than ~3 microns
cannot roll sufficiently and retain a sensible grittiness. In the case of
a trapped nanorobot-size diamond block slowly being squeezed
between opposed enamel surfaces (static force), the Young’s moduli
for enamel and diamond are 7.5 x 1010 N/m2 and 1.05 x 1012
N/m2
, respectively (Table 9.3), so the enamel deforms ~14 times
more than the diamond. Crystalline diamond can deform at least
~5% before fracturing, diamond composites (Chapter 11) much
more; a 50% strain in each enamel surface (an indentation equal to
the entire diamond block radius, probably causing the enamel to
fail) produces a 3.6% deformation across the diameter of the block,
slightly below the conservative tolerance limit for diamondoid fracture
strain. In the case of a 50-gram jaw moving at the maximum 0.1 m/sec
clenching velocity that is suddenly brought to a halt via enamel
deformation to a depth equal to a ~1 micron nanorobot radius across
a 1 cm2 enamel contact area, the jaw decelerates at ~1000 g’s producing
a kinetic force of ~500 N and a contact force of 5 x 106 N/m2 (~50
atm), well below the ~1011 N/m2 failure strength of solid diamond.
However, nanorobot crushing strength is an explicit design
parameter which is normally significantly lower than for solid diamond
if the device has large unbraced internal voids or diameters that are
weak in compression. Such nanorobots may not be regarded as solid
diamond structures as assumed above. For example, the Euler buckling
force for a solid cylindrical rod of outer radius R is proportional to
R4 (Eqn. 9.44), but for a hollow cylinder with inner radius r the
buckling force is proportional instead to (R4
-r4
) during axial
compressions.364 Hence a trapped, thin-walled cylindrical nanorobot
of radius R with r/R = 0.90 buckles at only ~34% of the force needed
to buckle a solid rod of radius R, and thus could probably be crushed
by static compression of the teeth. The oral cavity appears to be the
only place in the human body where thin-walled medical nanorobots
might plausibly be destroyed by mechanical grinding. Such destruction is avoided by nanorobots with composite diamondoid shells
10% R thick at a maximum allowable strain  10%, or by
nanodevices possessing maps of mastication contact spots that
actively avoid those spots during nanorobotic perambulations.
9.5.2 Epidermal Locomotion
The epidermis is a modified cellular surface, so most of the
techniques described for cytoambulation (Section 9.4.3) are applicable
to epidermal locomotion as well. There are so many special situations
and obstacles to motility on skin that we can only mention a few of
them here:
A. Flaky Corneum—Desiccated stratified epidermal cells crack,
chip, or flake off entirely when rubbed or jostled with too much
force. Nanorobots traversing a dead cell could find themselves flaked
off into the air or onto the floor, especially if the surface is rubbed
by the patient.
B. Steep Topography—Many physical features of the skin are huge
in scale compared to a micron-size nanorobot and thus must be
carefully circumnavigated. Dermal fingerprint ridges are ~500
microns wide and 20-50 microns deep. Hair follicle shafts are 50-100
microns in diameter. Scent-secreting apocrine glands are ~200
microns in diameter; eccrine (sweat) glands are only 20 microns
wide. Skin-dwelling fungi (e.g., athlete’s foot) grow into irregular
globs 5-20 microns in size. The tongue surface includes taste buds
~150 microns wide and tiny papillae measuring 30 microns wide
and 80 microns long. Other surface features are described in Section
8.6.1. At the micron scale, the topmost layer of the epidermis is
littered with obstacles and protrusions, with electron micrographs
showing a surface that closely resembles a flaky puff pastry in
appearance.1571
C. Constant Motion—The skin is almost always in motion at
size scales up to ~1000 microns, folding and unfolding, stretching
and tightening, twisting and curving, with normally distant surfaces
being brought into and out of contact as the patient moves about
normally.
330 Nanomedicine • Volume I
D. Dust Mites and Bacteria—In eyelashes and eyebrows, the hairs
of the upper lip, in the ears, and elsewhere on the body, dust mites
measuring 150 microns x 300 microns survive by chewing up dead
skin cells. Epidermal-walking nanorobots must be able to identify mite
surfaces, and avoid climbing aboard them by mistake. Everyone
inhales a few mites now and then; mite excrement (to which some
patients are allergic) is concentrated into fecal packets so small and
light that they float in the air and may settle back onto the skin.
Many other surface-dwelling ectoparasites and microfauna similarly
must be avoided.3253 Bacterial density over most of the body surface is
quite low, ~103
/cm2
; the count ranges from ~102
/cm2 on the palms
and dorsa of the hands, up to 104
-105
/cm2 on the hairy
axilla, scalp, perineal regions, and beneath the distal end of the nail
plate.360
E. Obstructions—The skin may be covered with dirt, or grease,
or cooking oils and fats, or sebaceous gland oils, which may be many
tens or even hundreds of microns thick. Another potential obstacle
is the sweat wash—the skin can pour out up to 2 liters/hour of
perspiration. Nanorobots can easily crawl underneath the
tightest-fitting clothing or rubber gloves, although a patch of
superglue stuck to the skin could provide a formidable obstacle
requiring overpassage.
F. Itching/Crawling Sensations—Tickling sensations attributable
to isolated nanorobots traversing the skin are unlikely. Skin-crawling
~2-mm ants are readily detected; ~100-micron mites are not. Absolute
epidermal pressure stimulus thresholds, as measured by a laboratory
esthesiometer, range from a low of 2000 N/m2 at the tongue- and
finger-tip, up to 12,000 N/m2 on the back of the hand, 26,000
N/m2 on abdomen, 48,000 N/m2 on the loin, and a high of 250,000
N/m2 on the thickest part of the sole of the foot.773 By comparison,
the weight of a (100 micron)3 nanorobot, if distributed across a
(100 micron)2 contact surface, is only ~1 N/m2
, quite undetectable
on the skin. At a velocity of 1 cm/sec, the inertial force required to
propel a 100-micron nanorobot is ~1 nN (Section 9.4.2.1). This
additional force, if distributed over 10 footpads each of area 100
micron2
, gives a shear pressure of ~1 N/m2 across all contact surfaces,
also undetectable; the sensible threshold velocity for such a nanorobot
is ~45 cm/sec. Skin sensor frequency response is << KHz (Table
7.3), whereas skin walkers  10 microns in size may employ νleg
 KHz leg motions; the weight of a 1 micron3 nanorobot produces
only ~0.01 N/m2
 of contact pressure.
Nanorobots of large size can also step over most of the obstacles
described above. Consider an Rnano = 50 micron walking nanorobot
with Nleg = 10, Lleg = 100 microns, Rleg = 15 microns, and vleg =
1 cm/sec as defined for Eqn. 9.82, with νleg ~ vleg / 2 Lleg ~ 50 Hz.
From Eqn. 9.75, the viscous force per leg is Fleg ~ FnanoN ~ 5 nN in
a 20˚C water bath, 0.1 nN in 20˚C air. From Eqn. 9.73, Fnano
~9 nN in water, 0.2 nN in air. Thus the total driving force Ftotal = 59
nN in water, 1.2 nN in air, assuming a still medium.
Another way to avoid obstacles is to hop over them in the manner
of a jumping flea, an insect that subjects itself to an acceleration of
~200 g’s while leaping ~130 times its own dimension.739
Diamondoid saltators could tolerate much higher accelerations,
although it is important not to disturb the takeoff surface; also,
airborne ex vivo trajectories may be only poorly controlled. The
approach is interesting1982,2385,2386 but will not be considered further
in this book.
What about dislodgement forces? Assuming a headwind of v ~ 1
m/sec and a d ~ 10 micron boundary layer, then from Eqn. 9.58 the
shear stress (and shear force) on a 100-micron wide nanorobot is
F/A ~ 100 N/m2 (1000 nN) in water, 2 N/m2 (20 nN) in air. A
single 10 micron2
 footpad with a conservative adhesive pressure of
105 N/m2 (Section 9.4.3.3) provides a 1000 nN anchorage force,
allowing the nanorobot to remain adhered to the skin even in the
strongest water currents (e.g., white water rapids, showers, or spas
at ~1 m/sec per anchored footpad used) and air currents (e.g., up to
~50 m/sec (~110 mph) winds per anchored footpad used). A finger
rubbed hard against the skin with the objective of dislodging
adhered epidermal-resident nanorobots may apply up to 10 N of
force over a ~1 cm2 area, giving a ~105 N/m2 shear force (~ 1,000,000
nN) which may be resisted by ten 100 micron2 footpads each having a
maximum adhesive pressure of ~106
 N/m2
 (Section 9.4.3.3).
What about epidermal penetration? Complex and subtle
low-speed methods are readily imagined (Section 9.4.4), but let us
consider here a simple brute-force approach. Failure strength of
human skin is ~107 N/m2 (Table 9.3), so a 1 micron2 rod may be
driven through the skin with a force of ~10,000 nN. A 100-micron
long telescoping manipulator arm with stiffness ~25,000 nN/nm
can apply 10,000 nN to the rod at 1 cm/sec producing an elastic
deflection in the arm of less than 1 nm, drawing ~100,000 pW of
power (manipulator arm power density ~106 watts/m3
) at the
moment of penetration (Section 9.3.1.4). Bruising and other
biocompatibility issues related to dermal penetration are deferred
to Chapter 15.
The surfaces of toenails and fingernails have 2-20 micron features
and longitudinal striations with 10-15 micron valleys, and are usually
littered with dirt, bits of skin, and other surface debris as small as
1-2 microns in size. The nail surface is heavily keratinized, with a
failure strength about 20 times higher than that of skin (Table 9.3).
Similar considerations apply as with the skin, in regard to nanorobot
locomotion.
What happens if the nanorobot falls off, or is otherwise removed
from, the epidermal surface? Solem1982 has analyzed the case of
nanorobots walking on walls and ceilings. Setting the electrostatic
image force (Eqn. 9.11) equal to the gravity force ρnano Lnano3 g for
a cubical conducting-surface nanorobot of edge Lnano, the voltage
required to cling to the ceiling without falling off is:

V z 2 L g (volts) plate sep nano nano
0 e
1/2
= 

 

 ρ
ε κ
{Eqn. 9.83}
Taking zsep = 0.5 microns, ρnano = 2000 kg/m3
, g = 9.81 m/sec2
, ε0
= 8.85 x 10-12 farad/m, κe = 1, and Lnano = 10 microns, then Vplate ~ 0.1
volt. Similarly, the largest nanorobot that can cling to the ceiling using
an adhesive contact surface of strength S has a characteristic
dimension:1982

L ~ S
 g max ρnano
{Eqn. 9.84}
For S = 10-100 N/m2 (typical for weak adhesives such as Post-It
notes), then Lmax ~ 500-5000 microns. By wetting the contact area
with water having surface tension γ ~ 73 x 10-3 N/m at room
temperature (Section 9.2.3), a cubical nanorobot clinging to the
ceiling may have a maximum characteristic dimension of:1982

L ~ 4
 g max ~ 3900 microns
nano
1/2
γ
ρ





 {Eqn. 9.85}
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 331
9.5.3 Nanoflight
Perhaps surprisingly, aerobotics has many useful applications in
nanomedicine. Examples include monitoring and diagnostic systems,
since flying nanorobots can transit the length of a patient’s body in ~1
sec or less (Chapter 18); sterile fields (Chapter 19); personal defensive
systems (Chapter 21); and accident recovery systems (Chapter 24).
Unfortunately, in 1998 the aerodynamics of micron-scale flight
systems was only lightly studied347,348,1573-1576,1982 and aerial robotics
was still considered an exotic sport2995 or a military curiosity.3175
9.5.3.1 Nanoflight and Reynolds Number
It has been observed that a 30-cm paper airplane will glide slowly
and stably, but a 3-cm paper airplane made from thinner paper
requires a much higher velocity/size ratio to remain airborne, and
with a noticeable lack of stability—sometimes the plane flies well,
sometimes not. If size is further reduced into the millimeter range,
the plane almost cannot fly.1573
As in the case of swimming, this transition can be explained in
terms of the Reynolds number NR (Section 9.4.2.1), the ratio of
inertial to viscous forces acting on a body that is passing through a
fluid such as air. Generally speaking, microscopic organisms (e.g.,
NR ~ 10-5) or flying nanorobots with NR << 1 move by utilizing
viscosity, while macroscopic objects such as aircraft (e.g., NR ~ 108
)
with NR >>1 use inertia to generate lift. Millimeter-size airfoils with
NR ~0.1-100, as typified by flying insects, occupy a transitional
regime. Insects make use of both inertial and viscous forces, often
employing unusual wing flapping patterns1577,1578,1585 and elastic
energy storage systems1578,1582 to remain aloft. The smallest known
flying insect1579 that can make any use of aerodynamic lift (inertial)
forces is the four-winged parasitic chalcid wasp Encarsia formosa,
which has a total wingspan of ~1.4 mm.1578 Aerobotic machines
with wingspans smaller than ~100 microns probably must make
almost exclusive use of viscous propulsive forces.363
A nanorobot of dimension L flying at velocity v through 20˚C
sea-level dry air (ρair = 1.205 kg/m3
, absolute viscosity ηair = 0.0183
x 10-3 kg/m-sec)763 has a Reynolds number NR = 66,000 v L (Eqn.
9.65). Viscous forces dominate when NR < 1, or when:

v 15
L micron
< ( / m sec) {Eqn. 9.86}
where Lmicron is characteristic nanorobot size expressed in microns.
Thus a 1-micron nanorobot remains in the viscous regime up to
~ 15 m/sec flight velocity (34 mph), a sufficient speed for most medical
applications. Note that formulas involving viscous forces may not
apply to aerobotic airfoils with L λgas (Eqn. 9.23), indicating
transitional or ballistic flow (Section 9.2.4).
The main implication of Eqn. 9.86 is that conventional aeronautics
technologies such as rigid wings and jets are usually inappropriate
for micron-size flyers. Instead, aerial nanorobots may more profitably
employ natation mechanisms as described in Section 9.4.2.5,
including surface deformations (e.g., flexible oars or wings, cilia,
invaginating doughnuts, rotating spheroids, traveling waves),
inclined planes (e.g., screw drives, corkscrews, flagella), volume
displacement, and viscous anchoring. Specific aeromotive mechanisms
are of great interest but will not be considered further in this Volume.
In many cases, a viscous-regime nanorobot may exit the bodily fluids
and enter the atmosphere,* or vice versa, using the same propulsive
mechanisms, though operated at a modified speed or pitch angle.
 9.5.3.2 Nanoflight and Gravity
In addition to forward progression through the medium, atmospheric
flight requires active and continuous support against the pull of
gravity. For small spherical objects of radius R = Rnano in the laminar
flow (low NR) regime, the rate of fall in a still medium is approximated
by Stokes Law for Sedimentation (Eqn. 3.10).** For nanorobots
near the Earth’s surface that are falling in air, with g = 9.81 m/sec2
,
ρparticle ~ 1000 kg/m3
, ρfluid = ρair and η = ηair, then terminal velocity
vt = 1.2 x 108
 Rnano2 (m/sec). An Rnano = 1 micron nanorobot falls at
vt = 120 microns/sec; an Rnano = 10 micron nanorobot falls at
vt = 1.2 cm/sec, requiring a rather modest power expenditure of
only Pnano/e% = (0.5 pW)/e% to remain aloft (Eqn. 9.74).
Note also that in free atmosphere only the largest particles ever
settle out by gravity alone. Thermal and dynamic turbulence keeps
most of the smaller particles in suspension long beyond the period
indicated by Eqn. 3.10. For example, nanorobot thermal velocity
vthermal (Eqn. 3.3) exceeds nanorobot terminal velocity vt (Eqn. 3.10)
for a nanorobot radius Rnano  2 microns in sea level air at 20˚C
with ρnano ~ 1000 kg/m3
. The energy required to raise a 1-micron
nanorobot a height of ~1 micron in a 1 g gravity field equals ~kT.
Random indoor atmospheric eddies of 1-10 cm/sec caused by the
movements of people, animals, doors, and heating and air conditioning systems equal or exceed the Stokes terminal velocity for
particles of R  10-30 microns.
9.5.3.3 Buoyant Nanoballoons
Gravity may also be overcome by reducing density relative to the
surrounding medium. An object has neutral buoyancy when its
density equals that of the medium in which it is suspended,
becoming “weightless” within that medium. For example, a
nanorobot whose interior volume consists 90% of vacuum has a vt
~10 times smaller than a completely solid object of equal size.
What is the tiniest possible lighter-than-air balloon? J.S. Hall
notes that for a one-atom-thick graphene shell the out-of-plane
bending stiffness of the C-C bond is much lower than the in-plane
stretching stiffness. This is why hollow fullerenes of submicron
diameter are experimentally observed to collapse (and remain collapsed
due to van der Waals forces) even when their interiors are not
evacuated. Simple internal bracing sufficient to stabilize an evacuated
structure outweighs the lift. For example, applying the Euler buckling
formula (Eqn. 9.44) to three diamondoid orthogonal
diametral stiffening rods inside a spherical evacuated nanoballoon
gives a scale-invariant total beam mass ~6 times the mass of the
displaced air, hence net lift is impossible for any device radius using
this minimal crossbeam design although macroscale geodesic
trusswork-stabilized vacuum balloons cannot be ruled out. (See also
Section 10.3.5.)
Hall also observes that pressurizing nanoballoons to atmospheric
pressure removes most shell stress. This strategy also eliminates the
need to thicken the single-atom shell walls, up to a nanoballoon
radius of at least σw twall / ∆p ~ 100 microns, taking wall thickness
twall = 0.17 nm, a conservative diamondoid wall working stress σw =
1010 N/m2 (Table 9.3), and allowing a maximum environmental
* From Eqn. 9.14, the capillary force will restrain a 1-micron diameter nanorobot with a force of ~440 nN in pure water at the liquid-air interface due to surface tension, but
this attraction may be reduced at least to ~4 nN by discharging small aliquots of the appropriate surfactants into the local aqueous environment; Section 9.2.3.
** In sea level pressure dry air, particles of 100 nm diameter will fall about twice as fast as estimated by Eqn. 3.10; 10-nm diameter particles fall about 12 times as fast as
Stokes’ sedimentation formula predicts.1572
332 Nanomedicine • Volume I
pressure fluctuation of ∆p ~ 0.17 atm (vs. ~0.002 atm for 140 dB
sound waves (Section 4.9.1.5), ~0.1 atm normal barometric variation
(Section 4.9.1.6), and ~2 atm maximum sound pressure in air).
Bursting strength of pressure shells is briefly treated in Section 10.3.1.
The smallest atmospheric-pressurized atomic-walled nanoballoon
that can achieve neutral buoyancy has radius Rmin = 3 ρwall twall /
(ρair - ρgas), where ρwall is wall density, ρair is air density (ρair = 1.2929
kg/m3 for dry air at STP), and ρgas is the density of the filling gas.
Thus Rmin = 1.6 micron for hydrogen gas with ρgas = 0.0899 kg/m3
;
Rmin = 1.7 micron for STP helium gas (ρgas = 0.1785 kg/m3
) which,
in conjunction with a slightly thicker nondiamondoid (e.g., sapphire)
shell, eliminates flammability concerns at all device number densities.
Diffusion leakage must also be addressed (Section 10.3.4).
Nanoballoons of radius R > Rmin can carry payloads of mass:

M 4
3 payload air R 1 4 t R 3 gas
air wall wall
2 = − 




 π ρ − ρ
ρ π ρ
{Eqn.9.87}
For instance, a helium-filled R = 2.2-micron fullerene sphere
can lift a ~10-17 kg payload mass, representing a payload volume of
~0.01 micron3 at ρpayload ~ 1000 kg/m3
. Expanding nanoballoon
radius to R = 6.8 microns increases payload volume to ~1 micron3
.
Pressurized buoyancy-based lift systems may be useful either in
early-generation aerial nanodevices that must rely upon primitive
energy supplies, or in default-float applications. However, the modest
power expenditure needed to overcome gravity in micron-size
devices (Section 9.5.3.2) suggests that nonbuoyant active-propulsion
designs will normally be preferred.
9.5.3.4 Nanoflyer Force and Power Requirements
What forces must be applied, and what power must be expended,
in order for a flying nanorobot to maintain continuous and controlled
progression through the air? An exact calculation requires a detailed
knowledge of the mode of locomotion, the shape and dimensions
of wing or body, airfoil surface characteristics, and many other factors.
However, the force needed to drive a spherical flyer of mass mnano
through the air at a velocity vnano may be approximated by summing
the three drag components of skin friction (Fviscous), pressure drag
(Finertial), and induced drag due to lift (Finduced), as:

F F F F (newtons) nano viscous inertial induced =++ {Eqn. 9.88}

F ~ 6 R v viscous air nano nano π η {Eqn. 9.89}

F ~C ( R )( v )/2 inertial D nano
2
air nano
2 π ρ {Eqn. 9.90}
while conservatively taking the dimensionless coefficient of drag
CD ~ 2. Induced drag, associated with the shedding of transient
vortexes from each wing tip, is an important consideration in
macroscale winged vehicles but may be ignored here (e.g., Finduced ~ 0)
for microscale flyers operating in the viscous or transitional flight
regimes.
The nanorobot aeromotive energy plant, of efficiency e%, must
develop a continuous power of:

P ~ v F
e% (watts) nano nano nano {Eqn. 9.91}
giving a whole-device power density of:

D ~ 3 P
4 R (watts/m ) nano nano
nano
3
3
π
{Eqn. 9.92}
These formulas give somewhat conservative results (e.g., overestimates of required force and power) because they do not take
into account special body shapes, dynamic wing motions (e.g.,
delayed stall, rotational circulation, and wake capture3268), virtually
complete pressure recovery in creeping flow, and so forth that may
be used to improve flight efficiency in an optimized design. On the
other hand, flight efficiency may be reduced by the accretion of
water molecules and other environmental substances on working
surfaces, and by the power expended in shearing air (dominant at
the micron scale) or in imparting net kinetic energy to the air (at
higher Reynolds numbers).
Table 9.5 shows force, power, and power density for spherical
flying nanorobots of various sizes and airspeeds, computed using
the above relations. Note that power scales as ~vnano2 in the viscous
regime, ~vnano3
 in the transitional regime. (The maximum sustainable
velocity for transitional-regime insects is ~11 m/sec*.)
 For an Rnano = 1 micron aerial nanorobot, taking ηair = 0.0183
x 10-3 kg/m-sec and ρair = 1.205 kg/m3
 in dry air at 20˚C and at 1
atm, with rnano ~ 1000 kg/m and e% = 0.10 (10%), a vnano = 1 cm/sec
airspeed requires Fnano ~ 4 pN and a Pnano ~ 0.4 pW powerplant
(Dnano ~ 82,000 watts/m3
). At vnano = 1 m/sec, then Fnano ~ 350 pN
and Pnano ~ 3500 pW powerplant (Dnano ~ 8 x 108 watts/m3
). A
much larger Rnano = 1 mm nanorobot flying at vnano = 1 m/sec
requires Fnano ~ 4 µN and Pnano ~ 41 µW (Dnano ~ 10,000 watts/m3
).
Again, an optimized design might reduce some of the power figures
by a factor of 10 or more.
Aerobot power density Dnano scales as ~vnano2 and ~Rnano-2 in the
viscous regime. In the transitional regime, power density scales as
~vnano3
, and as ~Rnano-2 at low velocities and ~Rnano-1 at high velocities.
Thus, to minimize power density and therefore conserve energy,
circumcorporeal clouds of aerial nanorobots may coalesce into progressively larger but fewer tightly-packed clumps as the collective
velocity of the cloud moves to higher airspeeds, assuming that the
aeromotive mechanism design is largely scale-invariant over the full
size range of the progressive aggregations. This strategy is most
effective in the viscous regime.
For example, consider a cloudlet consisting of 1 million
nanorobots, each of size Rnano = 1 micron. With individual
nanorobots traveling at vnano ~ 30 cm/sec, the cloudlet consumes
~0.4 milliwatts and operates at a power density of ~108 watts/m3
.
Now assume that the cloudlet must speed up to 10 m/sec to track a
fast-moving object around which it is stationkeeping, or to compensate for a heavy wind. If the individual nanorobots comprising
the cloudlet simply increase their airspeed to 10 m/sec, then power
density in each nanorobot increases to ~1011 watts/m3 and cloudlet
power consumption rises to ~400 milliwatts (a 1000-fold increase).
However, if the nanorobots temporarily aggregate into a single
collective approximating a single device of Rnano = 100 microns,
* The first well-documented report of maximum insect flight speed was by Tillyard,3157 who used a stopwatch to time the flight of the dragonfly Australophlebia costalis along
a downhill slope at 27 m/sec; Hocking3158 subsequently calculated that the maximum speed of A. costalis would only be 16 m/sec on a level surface. Unpublished slow-motion
cinematography research by Butler3159 reported an unconfirmed 40 m/sec burst of speed by the male Hybomitra hinei wrighti during an Immelmann Turn maneuver3160 at the
beginning of female pursuit.
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 333
then the power consumption of the collective can be held to the
original 0.4 milliwatts and power density remains constant at ~108
watts/m3
. Facultative aggregation may permit stationkeeping over a
wide range of velocities without significantly increasing power.
(Other power-conserving behaviors, such as preferential migration
into the downwind slipstream of a rapidly-moving tracked object,
are not considered further here but may be useful.)
How fast can nanoflyers accelerate? The answer is highly
design-dependent but a crude generalization may be made. Consider a
spherical nanorobot of radius Rnano that uses circumferential wings
of similar size to impart momentum to a nearby mass of air by
speeding up that mass of air to a higher velocity. The wings sweep
air from a circular cross-section of radius 2Rnano. The nanoflyer
accelerates with constant acceleration anano = vnano2 / 2 Xaccel from a
standing start to a final velocity vnano in a time taccel = vnano/anano and
a running distance Xaccel. The mass of the swept-out air is Mair = 4 π
ρair Xaccel Rnano2 and the mass of the nanorobot is Mnano = (4/3) π
ρnano Rnano3
. To conserve momentum, Mair vair = Mnano vnano, hence
vair = ρnano vnano Rnano / 3 ρair Xaccel; vair < vsound = 343 m/sec in dry
air at 20˚C and 1 atm to remain subsonic (Section 9.5.3.5). The
kinetic energy imparted to the swept-out air is KEair = (1/2) Mair
vair2 and to the nanorobot is KEnano = (1/2) Mnano vnano2
, with KEtotal
= KEair + KEnano. Neglecting drag losses (e.g., ~3500 pW for Rnano
= 1 micron and vnano = 1 m/sec; Table 9.5) and assuming negligible
losses within the air-accelerating mechanism itself and any drag on
the air used as reaction mass, then propulsive efficiency is e%
~ KEnano / KEtotal and total power consumption is Pnano ~ Pdrag +
(KEtotal / e% taccel). In the examples below we take Rnano = 1
micron, vnano = 1 m/sec, Pdrag ~ 3500 pW (Table 9.5), ρair = 1.205
kg/m3 for dry air at 20˚C and 1 atm, and ρnano = 1000 kg/m3
; here
the Reynolds number is near unity.
A 1 micron3 high-density (~1012 W/m3
; Chapter 6) powerplant
develops Pnano ~ 1 million pW. At this high power level, a nanorobot
can accelerate at anano ~ 12,000 g’s for taccel ~ 9 microsec, reaching
vnano = 1 m/sec after crossing a running distance of Xaccel ~ 4.4
microns with an efficiency of e% ~ (0.016) 1.6% and vair ~ 64 m/sec.
As an alternative approach, note that a 5-microsec gas discharge
from a simple pressure-release pump (Section 9.2.7.1) of volume
vreservoir ~ 0.1 micron3 having a pressure differential of 1000 atm
(storing ~108 J/m3
; Section 6.2.2.3) produces a mean discharge
power of Pnano ~ 2 million pW, which allows anano ~ 15,000 g’s of
acceleration with e% ~ (0.01) 1% for a maximum gas exit velocity
of vmax ~ 70 m/sec using a nozzle of length ltube = 1 micron and
radius rtube ~ 10 nm (Eqn. 9.36).
At a more modest Pnano ~ 4500 pW, the nanoflyer accelerates at
anano ~ 1100 g’s for taccel ~ 96 microsec, reaching vnano = 1 m/sec
after crossing a running distance of Xaccel ~ 48 microns with an
efficiency of e% ~ 0.15 (15%) and vair ~ 6 m/sec.
Attitude control of flying machines is a problem often mentioned
in MEMS aerobotics work;1576 airborne nanorobots may employ
Table 9.5. Conservatively Estimated Force, Power, and Power Density for Hovering and Flying Spherical Nanorobots as a
Function of Size and Velocity
(Rnano) (vterminal) (Force) ---------------------------------------Nanorobot Airspeed---------------------------------
Nanorobot Terminal (Power) (0 mph) (~0.02 mph) (~0.2 mph) (~2 mph) (~20 mph)
Radius Velocity (Density) At Hover 1 cm/sec 10 cm/sec 1 m/sec 10 m/sec
VISCOUS FLIGHT REGIME:
0.1 µm 1.2 µm/sec Fnano (N) 4.1 x 10-17 3.5 x 10-13 3.5 x 10-12 3.5 x 10-11 3.5 x 10-10
Pnano (W) 5.0 x 10-22 3.5 x 10-14 3.5 x 10-12 3.5 x 10-10 3.5 x 10-8
Dnano (W/m3
) 1.2 x 10-1 8.2 x 106 8.2 x 108 8.2 x 1010 8.3 x 1012
1 µm 120 µm/sec Fnano (N) 4.1 x 10-14 3.5 x 10-12 3.5 x 10-11 3.5 x 10-10 3.8 x 10-9
Pnano (W) 4.9 x 10-17 3.5 x 10-13 3.5 x 10-11 3.5 x 10-9 3.8 x 10-7
Dnano (W/m3
) 1.2 x 101 8.2 x 104 8.2 x 106 8.3 x 108 9.1 x 1010
10 µm 1.2 cm/sec Fnano (N) 4.2 x 10-11 3.5 x 10-11 3.5 x 10-10 3.8 x 10-9 7.2 x 10-8
Pnano (W) 5.0 x 10-12 3.5 x 10-12 3.5 X 10-10 3.8 x 10-8 7.2 x 10-6
Dnano (W/m3
) 1.2 x 103 8.2 x 102 8.3 x 104 9.1 x 106 1.7 x 109
TRANSITIONAL FLIGHT REGIME:
100 µm 68 cm/sec Fnano (N) 4.1 x 10-8 3.5 x 10-10 3.8 x 10-9 7.2 x 10-8 4.1 x 10-6
Pnano (W) 2.8 x 10-7 3.5 x 10-11 3.8 x 10-9 7.2 x 10-7 4.1 x 10-4
Dnano (W/m3
) 6.6 x 104 8.3 x 100 9.1 x 102 1.7 x 105 9.9 x 107
1 mm 3.2 m/sec Fnano (N) 4.0 x 10-5* 3.8 x 10-9 7.2 x 10-8 4.1 x 10-6 3.8 x 10-4
Pnano (W) 1.3 x 10-3* 3.8 x 10-10 7.2 x 10-8 4.1 x 10-5 3.8 x 10-2
Dnano (W/m3
) 3.0 x 105
* 9.1 x 10-2 1.7 x 101 9.9 x 103 9.1 x 106
1 cm 10 m/sec Fnano (N) ---* 7.2 x 10-8 4.1 x 10-6 3.8 x 10-4 3.8 x 10-2
Pnano (W) ---* 7.2 x 10-9 4.1 x 10-6 3.8 x 10-3 3.8 x 100
Dnano (W/m3
) ---* 1.7 x 10-3 9.9 x 10-1 9.1 x 102 9.0 x 105
* aerodynamic lift forces available for hovering at this size scale
334 Nanomedicine • Volume I
gravity-based dynamic stabilization (Section 8.3.3), gyrostabilization
(Section 9.4.2.2), or other means. In 1998, the energetics and control
of steering maneuvers in highly-maneuverable insects was being
investigated.1581,1582
9.5.3.5 Hovering Flight
In large helicopters, thrust is produced by imparting a downward
velocity to the mass of air flowing through the rotor, with lift
proportional to the change in momentum. In 1997, engineers at
the Institute for Microtechnology in Mainz, Germany, constructed
a 3-cm long, 1-cm tall mini-helicopter weighing 0.3 gm with two
blades turning at ~1700 Hz, and flew it to a hovering altitude of
13 cm, then landed it safely. I. Kroo at Stanford University has built
and flown a “mesicopter” whose motor is 3 mm in diameter and
5 mm long, weighing ~0.3 gm, that turns the oddly-shaped rotors
at ~50,000 rpm.3246
As helicopter size shrinks through the transitional regime, drag
grows at the expense of lift and the rotorblade microhelicopter
becomes increasing inefficient. However, the viscous-lift helicopter
(Fig. 9.22) is estimated to be able to hover by rotating its four wheels
at a frequency of νwheel ~ 3 ρnano g Rwheel / 32 ηair ~ 1 KHz, taking
ρnano = 2000 kg/m3
, g = 9.81 m/sec2
, and Rwheel = 10 micron.1982
In the general case, the terminal velocity vterminal of a compact
nonaerodynamic body of any size falling through fluid may be
approximated by setting:

F F 4
3 R g ( ) viscous inertial nano
3 + = π ρρ air nano − {Eqn. 9.93}
and solving the resulting quadratic for vterminal (= vnano), using Fviscous
and Finertial for spherical bodies from Eqns. 9.89 and 9.90. This
velocity may then be used in Eqns. 9.88 through 9.92 to conservatively
estimate Fnano, Pnano, and Dnano for hovering. Representative values
are given in Table 9.5, assuming flight in dry sea-level air and
powerplant efficiency e% = 0.10 (10%). Hovering power Phover scales
as ~Rnano5 for Rnano  10 microns and as ~Rnano3.5 in the Rnano
~ 0.1-1 mm range; for Rnano  1 mm, aerodynamic lift forces are
available, the computation of which is beyond the scope of this
book. For Rnano = 1 micron in air, vterminal = 120 microns/sec (Section
9.5.3.2) and Phover ~ 0.00005 pW (e% = 0.10 (10%)); for Rnano = 10
microns, vterminal = 1.2 cm/sec and Phover ~ 5 pW (e% = 0.10 (10%)).
In the special case of flapping winged aerobots in the transitional
flight regime (e.g., 100 microns  Rnano  10 cm) during
steady-state hovering, T. Weis-Fogh1578,1583 calculates that the average
aerodynamic power needed for small winged objects to remain airborne
is:

P 2
3 C w L (watts) hover
2
air D wing
3
wing
3
wing wing
4 = πρ τ ν ϕ
{Eqn. 9.94}
where ρair = 1.205 kg/m3 at 1 atm and 20˚C, τ is a shape factor that
equals 0.5 for a rectangular wing, 0.1 for a triangular wing attached
at the base, and 0.4 for a triangular wing attached at the apex; CD =
0.07-0.36 for bats, birds, and insects with wing length of Lwing =
0.25-13 cm and wing width (chord) of wwing = 0.7-55 mm (flight
mass M = 0.001-20 gm); wingstroke frequency νwing ranges from
15 Hz at Lwing = 13 cm (large hummingbird) to 600 Hz at Lwing
= 0.25 cm; and stroke angle ϕwing is the angle subtended by each
flapping wing in the flapping plane during a complete stroke cycle,
typically 2-3 radians (120˚-180˚).
Thus for example, the common honeybee Apis mellifera (NR ~
1900) has M = 100 milligrams, Lwing = 1.0 cm, wwing = 0.43 cm,
τ = 0.27 (half-ellipse), CD = 0.09, νwing = 240 Hz, and ϕwing = 2.09
rad, giving Phover = 1 milliwatt with a dynamic efficiency of e% = 30%*;
during level flight at peak speeds near ~6 m/sec,739
experimentally-measured honeybee metabolic demand is 20-60
milliwatts.1580 Honeybees can also carry a ~40 milligram payload
of honey. At the lower extreme of the transitional flight regime, the
parasitic chalcid wasp Encarsia formosa (NR ~ 15) has M = 25 µg,
Lwing = 620 microns, wwing = 230 microns, τ = 0.50 (rectangle),
CD = 3.20, νwing = 400 Hz, and ϕwing = 2.36 rad, giving Phover = 0.4
microwatt. Wingspeed vwing > 1.5 m/sec during the downstroke.1578
From the conservative assumption that biological wing muscles
are limited to ~200 watts/kg (~300,000 watts/m3
), Weis-Fogh1577
estimates than no flying animal with a mass larger than ~100 grams
can hover continuously by means of wing flapping and wing twisting
alone.
For artificial nanorobotic flyers near the edge of the design
envelope, maximum wingbeat frequency νmax  vwing / Lwing. To
avoid supersonic turbulence, vwing < vsound ~ 343 m/sec in air at
20˚C and 1 atm, giving νmax  10-100 MHz for Lwing = 3-30
microns and 100 KHz for Lwing = 3 mm. For each small-wing
cycle at 100 MHz, the boundary layer after an impulsive start is at
most (modified from Prandtl1584) δlayer ~ (ηair / ρair νmax)
1/2 ~ 0.4
micron ~ λgas ~ 0.2 microns, the mean free path of air molecules at
1 atm (Eqn. 9.23); faster cycling would allow insufficient time for
mechanical coupling to the medium. Note also that vsound is significantly slower than the torsional deformation propagation
velocity vtorsion ~ (G / ρwing)
1/2 ~ 12,000 m/sec along the wing
structure, taking G ~ 5 x 1011 N/m2 and ρwing ~ 3510 kg/m3 for
diamondoid materials. For comparison, the slowest insectile
wingbeat frequency is ~5 Hz for the swallowtail butterfly (Papilo
machaon); the fastest is ~1046 Hz for the tiny midge Forcipomyia in
natural conditions, up to ~2200 Hz at 310 K in laboratory
experiments with truncated wings.739,2033
9.5.3.6 No-Fly Zones
Most circumcorporeal aerial nanorobots should take care to avoid
certain well-defined zones near the human body. Perhaps the most
important medical issue is that particles under 5 microns in diameter
are dangerous to inhale. Concentrations of >108
 m-3 of free silica
particles <5 microns in size are usually considered hazardous.1572
Airborne nanorobots may be deployed in number densities of ~1012
m-3 or higher (Section 7.4.8), so anti-inhalation, inhale-safe, and
post-inhalation extraction protocols are essential in this application.
(Particles larger than 2-5 microns that are inspired through the nose
become trapped on the nasal mucus membrane and do not reach
the lower airway; Section 8.2.2.)
At rest, inhalation velocity at the trachea is vinhale rest ~ 0.3 m/sec.
During the heaviest exercise, turbulent airflow into the trachea peaks
near ~3.3 liters/sec at a maximum inhalation airspeed of vinhale max ~
5 m/sec (Section 8.2.2 and Eqn. 9.30). Nanorobots capable of flying
at vnano  vinhale max can outrun even the fastest inspired air by simply
reversing course. Nanorobots restricted to slower speeds can also
avoid inhalation by promptly initiating lateral motion immediately
upon entering either of two hemiellipsoidal no-fly zones which are
very conservatively estimated to be of major-axial radius:

R ~ R v
2 v (meters) clear
oral nhale max
nano
i {Eqn. 9.95}
* A few other dynamic efficiency figures for hovering flight include the hornet wasp (31%), hummingbird (51%), mosquito (70%), fruit fly (95%), and butterfly (97%).1578
Basic Capabilities • Manipulation and Locomotion 335
centered on the vestibule of the mouth and on the anterior nares of
the nose, where Roral ~ 2.5 cm is the radius of the oral orifice. Thus
a nanorobot with maximum airspeed vnano = 1 m/sec must observe
a perifacial no-fly major-axial radius of Rclear ~ 6 cm.
The second most important no-fly zone is the surface of the
skin, including (in special circumstances) the oral mucous (tissue)
membrane, tongue, soft palate, larynx, trachea, and nasal passages.
It is theoretically possible for diamondoid nanorobots with rigid
protrusions that accidentally impact the epidermis at high speeds to
irritate or even tear the skin. Consider a nanorobot of density ρ and
dimension L with a rigid appendage of dimension q L, that impacts
an epidermal surface of tearing strength σtear at a velocity v, coming
to a halt in a distance Xscratch. If the impact energy is transferred
exclusively through the appendage, then the skin tears if:

X L v
2 q
 (meters) scratch
2
2
tear
 ρ
σ
{Eqn. 9.96}
Taking ρ = 2000 kg/m3
, L = 100 microns, v = 10 m/sec, q/L =
0.1, and σtear = 107 N/m2
, then Xscratch  100 microns—potentially
leaving up to a 100-micron long, 10-micron deep scratch on the
skin. Long scalp hair, which often waves randomly in the wind,
should also be avoided (or actively managed; Chapter 28) by the
aerial nanorobot cloud. Nanorobots with 10-100 micron-long wings
operated at 0.1-1 MHz (avoiding subharmonics to ensure buzzless
performance) can have transverse wingtip velocities up to 1-10 m/sec,
which could damage soft tissues upon impact.
Another possible no-fly zone is the interior of the auditory
canal, especially immediately adjacent to the tympanic membrane. In
theory (Section 7.4.8), a very dense nanorobot cloud using acoustic
communications at high bandwidth could generate a pressure
intensity at the eardrum that exceeds the threshold of pain, although
this is unlikely in practice. (More interestingly, such a cloud could enter
the ear canal and emit coordinated audible subharmonics in the
100-1000 Hz range, thus “speaking” directly to the user; Section 7.4.6.3.)
Optical communication intensities are equally unlikely to
exceed safe limits in the vicinity of the human eye (Section 7.4.8).
However, entirely aside from the epidermal no-fly zone (above),
general-purpose aerial nanorobots should especially avoid all contact
with the surface of the cornea, the conjunctiva, and the inner surfaces
of the eyelid, in order to prevent irritation, or serious scoring and gouging (e.g., corneal ulcer, conjunctivitis, or superficial punctate keratitis),
or embedment in these much softer, exposed mucosal tissues.
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
CHAPTER 10
Other Basic Capabilities
This final Chapter describes a miscellany of important technical
capabilities that may prove useful in some or all medical
nanodevices, in various scenarios or theaters of operation. Any
one of these subjects deserves an entire chapter to itself, but
unfortunately there is only space in this introductory text for a
brief survey of each area. The most important of these topics is
computation (Section 10.2), including nanomechanical,
nanoelectronic, and biological computing, as well as nanoscale data
storage technologies. However, the fields of organic and fullerene
nanoelectronics, biocomputing, and quantum computing are
advancing so fast that whatever is written here will quickly become
obsolete. Thus our coverage in this Volume is limited to a broad
overview. Interested readers are strongly advised to consult the current
literature for the latest results.
Other important basic capabilities covered in this Chapter
include timers and nanoclocks with long-term nanosecond stability
(Section 10.1); high-pressure materials storage (Section 10.3);
defensive cytocidal and antiviral weaponry to allow the efficient
destruction of pathogenic intruders and unrepairable tumor cells
(Section 10.4); and the effects of very hot or very cold temperatures
on nanorobot materials and operations (Section 10.5).
10.1 Nanochronometry
Nanorobots will use clocks in many applications. Computer
gating,* navigation, and high-speed sensor applications may require
repeatable timing in the 1-1000 nanosec range, or 1-1000 microsec
for lower-speed chemical and chemotactic sensing, although
long-term clock stability is not especially critical for computing.
Neuron-mediated signals and muscle motions are monitored and
controlled on a 1-1000 millisec timescale, while conscious human
action and most human biorhythms occur in the 1-105
 sec range.
This Section briefly introduces human chronobiology (Section
10.1.1), then describes possible nanoscale oscillator systems that
could be useful in nanorobotic clocks (Section 10.1.2), basic principles
of pre- and post-infusion nanorobot chronometer synchronization
(Section 10.1.3), and dedicated chronometer organs (Section
10.1.4).
10.1.1 Human Chronobiology
The human body incorporates numerous biological
clocks.1665,1666 The best-known and most-studied example is the
daily (24-hour) endogenous circadian oscillator.1665 This internal
clock is normally reset by natural sunlight, which is much brighter
than indoor lighting. The clock, in turn, sets the cadence for most
of the other 24-hour body rhythms—for example, sleep/wakefulness
cycles (e.g., melatonin1676), urine production,1677 body temperature,
blood cortisol and ACTH cycles1677 (Appendix B), and the diurnal
rhythm of mitosis in epidermal epithelium (e.g., greatest during
sleep or inactivity, least during wakefulness or activity).359 The
circadian clock stability (variation in free-running period) is ~1%
in Drosophila1683 and ~0.2% in humans.3434
Mammalian circadian rhythms are regulated by a master pacemaker
within the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus (just
above the point at which the optic nerves from each eye cross in
mid-brain).1678 In humans, the SCN is comprised of ~10,000 special
cells that send out electrochemical signals in a 24-hour timing pattern.
Entrainment of the clock to light-dark cycles is mediated by photoreceptors in the retina,1679 with light information conveyed directly
from ganglion cells of the retina to the SCN via the
retinohypothalamic tract.1680 Mammals and other vertebrates have
another independent circadian clock in each retina, possibly driven
by the retinal cryptochromes CRY1 (also made in the SCN) and
CRY2, producing rhythms in local physiology1676 such as the diurnal
renewal cycles of rods and cones.1664 CRY1 is also abundant in skin
tissues. Clock-resetting photoreceptors have been found in the
human popliteal region (behind the knees),1675 and such photoreceptors may exist in many different tissues throughout the
human body.1673,1675
The current model for a core circadian oscillator comprises, in
part, a transcription/translation-based negative feedback loop in
which clock genes are rhythmically expressed, giving rise to cycling
levels of clock RNAs and proteins (negative elements). The proteins
then feed back, after a lag, to depress the level of their own transcripts,
perhaps by interfering with positive elements that increase transcription of the clock genes.1681 In 1998 this genetic network was still in
the discovery process.1667-1672 One ~100,000-base-pair gene, aptly
named “clock,” was known to produce an 855-residue protein
(mCLOCK in mice, 115.7 kD) that serves as a major regulator of
the ~10 other, still unidentified, genes thought to affect circadian
rhythm.1671,1672 (One portion of mCLOCK is the same as in a
related 1023-residue clock protein, dCLOCK, found in Drosophila
fruit flies1672). Circadian rhythms will almost certainly be made up
of many interconnected feedback loops that interact with the
CLOCK-related core pathway.1681 Itis believed that this interconnected
* Clocks are not strictly required for computation. D.E. Muller pioneered attempts1880,1881 in the late 1950s to eliminate all time dependencies in digital logic circuits, including
fundamental mode circuits,1882 speed-independent circuits and delay insensitive circuits (generally considered the most difficult, expensive and elusive circuits to design1883).
Traditional asynchronous control designs1884 employ considerably more circuitry than is required by a functionally equivalent clocked Boolean logic circuit; K.M. Fant and S.A.
Brandt1885 have devised a more parsimonious and theoretically complete approach to delay insensitive circuits called Null Convention Logic.
338 Nanomedicine • Volume I
ensemble will ultimately determine all of the classical circadian
properties—period length,1665,1666 temperature compensation,1682,1683
and resetting by light or temperature.1684,1685,1963 In 1998, most
chronobiologists believed that many of these outer loops would be
organism specific and that only the core loop would be more
universal.1681
In addition to the 24-hour circadian oscillator, many other
biological clocks have been identified in humans. For example, the
28-day menstrual cycle is timed by two ovarian clocks, each delimiting
a period of 14 days.1686 One of these two clocks is the Graafian
follicle and its production of estradiol, while the other clock is the
corpus luteum and its secretion of progesterone. Both are obligatorily
dependent upon the proper functioning of a third clock located in
the arcuate region of the hypothalamus, known as the GnRH pulse
generator,1687,3675-3678 which ensures the rhythmic production and
release of the gonadotropic hormones into the peripheral circulation
with a cyclical period of ~1 hour (±25% stability), coincident with
a 1-hour cycle of hypothalamic electrical activity (±12% stability).1686,1687 A 90-minute clock paces the development of the somites,
blocks of tissue that form in regular arrays along the spinal cord of
vertebrate embryos. One regulatory gene, named “chairy,” undergoes
repeated 90-minute activity cycles and is known not to require
protein synthesis; gene expression follows the repeating pattern
even when protein synthesis is biochemically blocked.1688 A much
longer half-weekly (circasemiseptan) pattern has been observed in
mitotic activity in cancer patients.3326
Other biological clocks abound. The stomach produces rhythmic
contractions of ~3/minute during digestion. Rhythmic segmentation
contractions of the bowel at ~0.2 Hz (Section 8.2.3) are driven by a
thin layer of specialized pacemaker cells called the intestinal cells of
Cajal, which demonstrate electrical oscillations at about the same
rate as the contractions.1725 Cardiac pacemaker cells in the sinoatrial
node emit a cyclical pulse that triggers a heartbeat at a ~1 Hz basal
rate. The respiratory centers in the medulla oblongata produce an
autonomic contraction cycle of the diaphragm at ~0.3 Hz. The
human eye produces many spontaneous rhythmic dilations and
constrictions, including high-frequency ocular microtremors present
in all people (mean frequency ~84-88 Hz),3679 accommodation
microfluctuations (~1-2 Hz)3681-3683 with the pupil varying <300
microns in diameter,3680 and low-frequency pupillary oscillations (e.g.,
~0.2 Hz “hippus”).3683-3685 Electrical rhythms generated by the brain
that are detectable by an electroencephalograph include alpha waves
predominantly in the occipital region at 8-13 Hz, beta waves in the
frontal and central areas at 18-30 Hz, delta waves at <4 Hz during
deep sleep or abnormal function, and theta waves in the temporal
and parietal areas at 4-7 Hz.1689
Individual cells display a number of oscillatory biochemical
pathways as well, including calcium ion oscillations, cyclic AMP
signalling, and various other cell cycles.1666 For instance, the glycolytic
enzyme oscillator, controlled primarily by phosphofructokinase, may
mediate various rhythmic physiological behaviors such as slow waves
of contraction in smooth muscle, electrical activity in neurons, and
insulin release from β islet cells of the pancreas. In one experiment,1690
this oscillator mediated a 55 mV voltage change in guinea pig
cardiomyocytes at 0.010 Hz (±10% stability) in an almost perfectly
sinusoidal pattern, although a few cells displayed oscillations with
irregular phase, amplitude, or both. In another experiment,
fluorescently-labeled puffs of tumor-cell cytoplasm were observed
being released through plasma membrane ruptures, regularly at ~0.05
Hz during a neutrophil-mediated cytolytic attack, matching the
nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate and superoxide
release periods for neutrophils.3663 By 1998 there was a growing
belief that many, if not most, of the cells in an animal may possess
individual biological clocks;2015 fruit flies were already known to
have clocks distributed throughout their wings, legs, and abdomen.
The human brain also possesses an interval timer1691,3686-3688
that allows a person to gauge the passage of seconds or minutes to
a mean accuracy of ±15%. The interval timer functions like a
stopwatch and resides in the basal ganglia, a region of the brain
that coordinates voluntary muscle movements. A population of
neurons in the substantia nigra releases regular pulses of dopamine into
an accumulator, called the caudate-putamen, a major part of the
basal ganglia. These pulses are then read via neural pathways to the
cerebral cortex which are known as striato-cortical loops. Other
internal “alarm clocks” that reliably allow waking from sleep at
desired times* have been described.2693
In vivo nanorobots should be able to eavesdrop on most of these
active chronobiological channels, gaining complete knowledge of
the oscillator frequencies and phase settings of virtually all of the
human body’s biological clock systems. For example, blood plasma
cortisol typically peaks in the morning (e.g., 6-23 x 10-8 gm/cm3 at
8 AM), then declines throughout the day (e.g., 3-15 x 10-8 gm/cm3
at 4 PM, then ~50% of 8 AM value at 10 PM). Melatonin (also
detectable in saliva) cycles in the opposite direction, normally peaking
at 6-7 x 10-11 gm/cm3 at night and then falling to 1.4 x 10-11 gm/
cm3 during the day (Appendix B). Longer cycles are easily tracked
too. For instance, blood viscosity in healthy young women shows
the rhythmic variation of the menstrual cycle, probably due to
changes in serum fibrinogen and globulin levels which can be
measured more directly.1325 These nanorobot-accessible readings
may be used either to measure “body time” or to control it, and in
some cases can recalibrate relevant onboard nanochronometers.
Environmental time cues may also be detected by in vivo
nanorobots (e.g., temporal macrosensing), such as the level of
illumination penetrating the epidermis (sometimes permitting
inference of day or night) or the all-pervasive 60/50 Hz (U.S./Europe)
electromagnetic hum generated by alternating current electrical supply
systems in common use throughout the world, a crude frequency
standard whose voltage can sometimes display time-of-day
load-related fluctuations.3026
10.1.2 Artificial Nanoscale Oscillators
Nanorobot clocks must perform at least two critical functions:
(1) Interval timing (measuring elapsed time between two or more
sequential events) and chronometry (maintaining an onboard
calendrical “standard time” in good calibration with an external time
standard such as Coordinated Universal Time3027,3302). Complete
clock design, including clutches, feedback mechanisms and governors,
dampers and filters, triggers and strikers, amplifiers and mixers, phase
detectors and counters, regenerative frequency dividers and frequency
multipliers, and antivibration housings, is very complex and quite
beyond the scope of this text. However, both timing and chronometry
require a high-frequency oscillator of known and stable frequency,
whose oscillations can then be counted for clocking purposes. If
frequency multipliers can be built, then the primary oscillator need
not be high frequency; the requirement for frequency stability is
more fundamental. Timing accuracies of 1-1000 nanosec are typically
needed for sensor (Chapter 4), navigation (Section 8.3.3), and
*Long ago, native American Indians of the Sioux tribe learned, after carefully controlled experiments, that they could use a full urinary bladder as a kind of alarm clock. By
drinking a certain amount of water at bedtime, they found they would awaken in a specific number of hours—drink more fluid, and they would awaken earlier from the urge
to urinate; drink less, and they would awaken later.2223
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 339
computational (Section 10.2) applications, with operating frequencies
up to νosc ~ 1 GHz and durations ranging from 1 microsec up to
105 sec (~1 day) between timed events or between clock recalibrations
(Section 10.1.3). This Section presents a brief survey of several useful
nanoscale oscillator systems.
10.1.2.1 Mechanochemical and Photochemical Oscillators
A chemical oscillator involves transitions between two
well-defined chemical, energetic, or conformational states. For
example, repetitive room-temperature protein folding such as
α-helical coiling may occur in ~10-6 sec (e.g., νosc ~ 1 MHz).467
Turnover number (molecules of substrate converted to product per
active site per unit time) for catalase, one of the fastest known
enzymes, is kcat = νosc = 40 MHz.759 Reversible gas phase reactions
may occur at up to 5 GHz.390 However, chemical-based clocks are
expected to display poor frequency stability. Most chemical reactions
display ~e-1/T rate dependence, giving a frequency stability of ∆ν / ν
~ 1% for a ~1 K temperature (T) variation in the oscillator near 310
K. Chemically-driven mechanical oscillators such as biological
cilia display a similar temperature dependency and frequency
stability.1695Time measurements that depend on the rates of thermally
activated bulk reactions also suffer Poisson noise in the reaction rate
from the statistics of interaction of many random independent
molecules.
Some molecular transitions are even faster. Molecular dynamics
simulations of carbonmonoxy-myoglobin show periodic openings
and closings of internal voids on a time scale of ~100 picosec,1693
giving νosc ~ 10 GHz. The torsional isomerization of the retinal
chromophore in rhodopsin from the 11-cis to the 11-trans structure, a
~0.5 nm physical motion detectable by displacement nanosensors
(Section 4.3.1), occurs within ~0.2 picosec of the absorption of the
500 nm photon (~420 zJ/molecule), potentially allowing event timing
at νosc ~ 5 THz. The frequency of decomposition of activated
complexes in classical reaction rate theory is given by Eyring1694 as
νactive ~ kT / h ~ 6 THz, approximately the characteristic timescale
for molecular vibrations. The frequency stability of these transitions is
unknown.
10.1.2.2 Mechanical Oscillators
The most accurate macroscale mechanical clock was the Shortt
pendulum clock, the primary timekeeper at the Greenwich and U.S.
Naval observatories until the late 1940s. The Shortt clock consisted
of a pendulum swinging freely in near-vacuum at constant temperature, driven by another identical clock slaved to the first; frequency
stability was ∆ν / ν ~ 4 x 10-8.
1696
In the nanoscale realm, Drexler10 proposes a νosc ~ 1 GHz
mechanical clock intended to drive a nanomechanical computer
CPU (Section 10.2.1). In this clock, a DC electrostatic motor (Section
6.3.5) turns a crankshaft that converts rotary motion into sinusoidally
oscillating linear motions of a drive rod. A cam surface on the drive
rod forces a follower rod into up or down positions, generating regular
clock pulses with intervals determined by the position of the follower
with respect to the mean position of the ramp on the cam surface.
Clock stability is limited by the stability of the crankshaft rotation rate.
The proposed DC electrostatic motor has radius Rmotor = 195 nm, rim
speed vrim = 1000 m/sec, and output power Pmotor = 1.1 microwatt,
giving a developed torque of τmotor ~ 2 x 10-16 N-m. From Eqn. 4.23,
the minimum detectable force (e.g., to establish feedback control, such
as a Watt governor) for a 195-nm force sensor with 99% reliability is at
most ~0.4 pN, giving a minimum detectable torque of τmin = 8 x 10-20
N-m. At constant torque, variation in crankshaft angular velocity ∆ω
/ ω (= ∆ν / ν) ~ τmin / τmotor = 4 x 10-4.
Numerous alternative mechanical oscillators are readily conceived:
A. Tuning Fork — A diamondoid tuning fork with tines of length
Lfork = 100 nm, half-thickness Rfork = 10 nm, density ρfork = 3510
kg/m3 and Young’s modulus Efork = 1.05 x 1012 N/m2 has a natural
vibrational frequency of:1697,1698

ν
π ρ osc fork fork
1/2
fork
1/2
fork
2
R E
 L = ~ 6 GHz {Eqn. 10.1}
In 1998, Sandia National Laboratories began offering a product
line of electrostatically-driven ~1 MHz polysilicon “tuning fork”
microresonators.
B. Helical Spring — A helical spring with spring constant ks = 10
N/m and mass mspring ~ 2 x 10-19 kg (~40-nm-edge diamond cube)
has a natural vibrational frequency of:

ν
π osc s
spring
1/2
1
2
k
m = ~ 1 GHz 




 {Eqn. 10.2}
ignoring gravity and spring mass.
C. Circular Membrane — A flexible, thin circular membrane of
radius Rmembrane = 100 nm, uniform density ρmembrane = 3510 kg/m3
,
and thickness hmembrane = 10 nm, if clamped at its boundary and
stretched by a tension Fmembrane (the force per unit length anywhere in
the membrane), has characteristic frequencies of
vibration of :1698

ν β
ρ osc membrane
1/2
membrane membrane
1/2
membrane
1/2
F
2 R h = ~ 8 GHz
{Eqn. 10.3}
where Fmembrane ~ 100 N/m for a 10-nm thick diamondoid sheet
stretched to near a conservative working stress of ~1010 N/m2
, and
β is a constant of order unity, derived from the roots of Bessel functions
for various diametral and circular vibrational nodes.
D. Torsional Pendulum — Another oscillator is the torsional
pendulum, wherein a diamondoid rod of radius Rrod = 35 nm, length
Lrod = 1900 nm, density ρrod = 3510 kg/m3
, and shear modulus
Grod = 5 x 1011 N/m2
, is clamped at one end and the other end
twists around the longitudinal axis in vacuo at a characteristic
oscillation frequency:1164

ν
π ρ osc 2
rod
rod
2
rod
1/2
G
4 L = ~ 1 GHz 




 {Eqn. 10.4}
If the end of this rod twists through an amplitude ∆X, then the
time averaged power loss due to shear radiation10 is Prad = π Rrod
6
∆X2
 Grod
3/2 / 256 Lrod
6 ρrod
1/2 ~ 26 pW for ∆X  95 nm, a rod strain
of ∆X / Lrod  5% and an oscillator power density of Drod = Prad / π
Rrod2
 Lrod ~ 4 x 109
 watts/m3
. The stored torsional energy is Erod =
(1/2) ktorsion θ2 = π Grod ∆X2
 Rrod2 / 4 Lrod, so the characteristic
decay time for the oscillation in the exemplar system is:

t ~
E
P
64 L
R G ~ 0.1 sec decay
rod
rad
rod
5
rod
1/2
rod
4
rod
1/2 = ρ {Eqn. 10.5}
340 Nanomedicine • Volume I
giving plenty of access time for clock resonance driver mechanisms.
Aside from exogenous noise sources, which can be considerable in
magnitude but may be filtered out by good design, one important
endogenous source of uncertainty in νosc is the elastic longitudinal
displacement (∆L) for the end of a thermally excited rod that
randomly alters rod length, slightly changing the frequency. For
bulk diamond at T ~ 300 K, and ignoring entropic contributions
which become important only in longer, narrower rods than in this
example, ∆L ~ 10-16 Lrod
1/2 / 2 Rrod (Tables 5.8 and 5.16 in
Drexler10). Since νosc ~ Lrod-1, then ∆ν / ν ~ ∆L / Lrod and so:

∆ν
ν = 





k −
L R ~ 1 x 10 elast
rod rod
2
1/2
6 {Eqn.10.6}
for kelast ~ 2.5 x 10-33 m3
, Lrod = 1900 nm, and Rrod = 35 nm.
Another systemic source of uncertainty is rod length variation due
to the slowly temporally- and spatially-varying ambient human body
temperature. Given a coefficient of volume expansion β = 3.5 x
10-6 K-1 for diamond,567 a typical variation of ∆T ~ 3 K per tcirc ~ 60
sec circulation time for bloodborne nanorobots, and a thermal
recalibration time of trecalib ~ 1 sec (to correct for temperature
dependence), then ∆ν / ν ~ trecalib ∆T β / tcirc ~ 2 x 10-7. J. Soreff
notes that yet another limitation on oscillator accuracy is the 1/Q
resonance width, which is a function of the design details.
Clock accuracy may be defined by a time measurement error
over a single observation cycle (Nobs = 1) of ∆terror = tactual - tclock,
where tactual = (νosc)
-1 and tclock = (νosc (1 + ∆ν / ν))-1. Time measurement errors over multiple cycles (e.g., Nobs = νosc tobs > 1), spanning
a total observation time tobs between clock recalibrations, are randomly
distributed around zero but do not sum to zero, constituting
instead a random walk with a maximum excursion of:

t ~N t t /
1 / error obs
1/2
error obs
osc
1/2
∆
ν
∆ν ν
∆ν ν = 

 

 +


 

 {Eqn. 10.7}
This assumes that the errors are uncorrelated—e.g., for thermal
fluctuation errors, individual observation times must lie at least
tEQ apart, where tEQ is the time required for thermal equilibration
with the environment (Eqn. 10.24). For the exemplar oscillator with
∆ν / ν ~ 10-6 at νosc = 1 GHz, accumulated terror ~ 1 nanosec during
a continuous (uncalibrated) observation time of tobs ~ 1000 sec.
10.1.2.3 Acoustic Transmission Line Oscillators
Drexler10 describes a diamondoid acoustic transmission line in
which a ~2 nN force pulse is initiated at one end, travels to the far
end at vsound ~ 17,300 m/sec, then is received by a mechanical
displacement probe, possibly with significant energy recovery. Such
lines may also be used to generate precisely delayed acoustic signal
sets suitable for clocking applications. Consider a “starter” pulse
applied to a short feeder line that symmetrically bifurcates into a set
of nline = 10 lines each of length ln = (1730 n) nm (n = 1, 2, ..., nline),
requiring a total length Lline = (1730) nline (nline + 1) / 2 = 95,150
nm of transmission line to obtain a set of lines having all nline time
delays. The bifurcated pulses arrive at the end of each line in 0.1
nanosec (n = 1), 0.2 nanosec (n = 2), ..., 1.0 nanosec (n = 10); any
of these pulses may be drawn off and used for diverse clocking
purposes, or may be fed back into the initiation mechanism and
used either to trigger the next starter pulse or to achieve more
robust error correction. If acoustic lines have a cross-sectional area
of ~30 nm2
, then the total volume of all ten lines is ~3,000,000
nm3
, which may be coiled into ~0.3% of the volume of a 1 micron3
nanorobot. Such diamondoid acoustic power transmission lines are
essentially lossless (Section 7.2.5.3). If a complete set of lines
containing all nline delays is not required, any desired single delay
time may be obtained by connecting up to nline segments end to
end, or by bouncing a pulse off of the ends of a single line up to nline
times.
Aside from the many potential frequency instabilities inherent
in pulse detection, signal re-initiation, and acoustic interferometry
mechanisms, two fundamental sources of frequency instability
include:
1. changes in the velocity of sound due to thermal variations, and;
2. changes in acoustic path length due to elastic longitudinal
displacements of thermally excited transmission rods.
First, the speed of transverse sound waves in an isotropic elastic
medium having Poisson’s ratio cPoisson (~0.1 for diamond) is given
by:10

v E 1 c
1 c 1 2 c ~ 17,300 m/sec sound
1/2
Poisson
Poisson Poisson
1/2
= 

 

 −
( ) + ( ) −






 ρ 
{Eqn. 10.8}
where Young’s modulus E = 1.05 x 1012 N/m2 and density ρ = 3510
kg/m3 for diamond. In addition to the thermal dependency of E, ρ
varies as (1 + βthermal T)-1 where T is temperature, because volume
changes according to the volume coefficient of thermal expansion
βthermal = 3.5 x 10-6 K-1 for diamond, 1.56 x 10-5 K-1 for sapphire. In an
uncorrected oscillator system, ∆ν / ν ~ ∆vsound / vsound ~ (1/2) βthermal
∆T ~ 10-5 for diamondoid transmission lines, assuming that ∆T ~ 6 K
temperature variations are typically encountered inside the human
body (Table 8.11). Correcting oscillator timing using
independent temperature sensors accurate to ∆Tmin / T ~ 10-6
(Section 4.6), and ignoring other possible sources of frequency
instability (which may be significant), could reduce measurement
∆T to ~310 microkelvins at T ~ 310 K, thus improving ∆ν / ν
significantly for this source of frequency instability.
Second, longitudinal displacements ∆L / Lrod ~ 10-4 - 10-5 at
300 K for rods of length Lrod = 1.73-17.3 microns and cross-section
Arod ~ 30 nm2 (Figure 5.8 in Drexler10); J. Soreff observes that
∆L / Lrod ~ (kT / E Lrod Arod)
1/2 ~ 10-6 for ~0.01 micron3
-volume
systems. For the zeroth longitudinal vibrational mode,10 these displacements occur on a timescale νosc-1 = 4 Lrod (ρ / E)1/2 = 0.4-4
nanosec, comparable to signal transit times, taking ρ and E for
diamond as above and Lrod = (1730 n) nm with n = 1, 2, ..., nline.
This may restrict ∆ν / ν to ~ 10-6 unless transmission lines can be
further rigidized by end-clamping, sheathing, or latticed bracing at
intervals, all of which, in effect, enlarge Arod.
10.1.2.4 Quartz Resonators
Piezoelectric quartz crystals, when cut in a predetermined manner
and mounted so that two opposing faces have electrical contacts,
will compress or expand when an oscillating electric field is applied
across the faces.1701,1702 The amplitude of crystal vibration falls off
very rapidly as the applied electric field frequency deviates from the
resonant frequency of the crystal. (Cyclical mechanical compressions
at the resonant frequency also induce oscillating electric fields of
maximum amplitude.) In 1998, most high-precision timing devices
were based on quartz crystal resonators, with ~2 billion resonators
manufactured annually worldwide for oscillator, clock, and filter
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 341
applications.1699 Commercially-available off-the-shelf GHz devices
(e.g., Micro Networks’ M101 resonator) typically displayed ~10 ppm
stability, or ∆ν / ν ~ 10-5, readily improved to ~10-7 in
temperature-controlled ovens.
The fundamental mode resonant frequency of a quartz crystal
plate of thickness dquartz ~ 1 micron (~2000 molecular layers thick),
density ρquartz ~ 2650 kg/m3
,
763 and elastic (Young’s) modulus Equartz
~ 1.1 x 1011 N/m2
 (Table 9.3) vibrating in thickness mode is:1699

ν
ρ osc quartz
quartz
quartz
1/2
1
2 d
E = ~ 3 GHz 










 {Eqn. 10.9}
The resonant frequencies of the highest-quality, lowest-noise
quartz macroresonators can be measured with a precision of 14
significant figures,1699 e.g., the noise is ∆ν / ν ~ 3 x 10-14 at the
optimum measurement times.1700 However, each variable in Eqn.
10.9 is temperature dependent. For instance, the thermal expansion of
quartz (affecting density) and the temperature coefficients of Equartz
(ranging from positive to negative values) are highly dependent on
the angles of cut of the plate relative to the crystallographic axes.
Quartz resonator frequency may vary monotonically with temperature
at 10-5 - 10-4 K-1; the noise floor (i.e., the Allan deviation
floor1702) for quartz microresonators has been estimated1699 as
∆ν / ν ~ (1.2 x 10-19 Hz-1) νosc ~ 10-10 for νosc ~ 1 GHz. Atomistic
simulation of submicron quartz oscillators by Broughton2669 suggests
that such oscillators must have at least ~106 atoms to display bulk
elastic constants, and that differences from continuum mechanical
frequency predictions are observable for 17-nm (or smaller) devices,
and that nanoscale devices with even a single defect may exhibit
dramatic anharmonicity.
10.1.2.5 Atomic Frequency Standards
The most accurate oscillators are the Atomic Frequency Standards
(AFS) used in “atomic clocks.” In these “clocks,” an atom flips
between two slightly different configurations—one in which the
electron spin and the nuclear spin point in the same direction, and
another configuration in which the two spins point in opposite
directions. In its original form,3028,3029 a beam of cesium (Cs133)
atoms is emitted from an oven and passes through an evacuated
(~10-11 atm) chamber, where the atoms are focused by one fixed
magnet, then defocused by a second fixed magnet. Between the two
fixed magnets, the beam passes through a microwave field. When
the frequency of this oscillating field exactly matches a natural atomic
resonance ground-state hyperfine transition frequency of Cs
(~9.192,631,770 GHz), the spin energy state can switch polarity,
allowing “flipped” atoms to focus, rather than defocus, at the second
fixed magnet. Atoms arriving at the focus are ionized by a hot-wire
ionizer target, then directed onto an electron multiplier by a mass
spectrometer to be counted. The microwave frequency is adjusted
until the electron multiplier output current is maximized, constituting
the measurement of the atoms’ resonance frequency.
Early cesium AFSs were used to recalibrate a quartz oscillator about
once a day, achieving ∆ν / ν ~ 3 x 10-11. In 1998, the best non-cryogenic
laboratory Cs or Rb (rubidium) AFS had ∆ν / ν ~ 2 x 10-14, with
a temperature stability of ~10-13 K-1 between 263-313 K and a
magnetic stability of ~10-12/gauss.1703 The smallest non-cryogenic Rb
AFS was a space-qualified system with mass of 1.3 kg and power consumption of 11 watts (~104 watts/m3
), achieving ∆ν / ν  5 x 10-13.
Another system that achieved ∆ν / ν  5 x 10-14 had mass ~5.5 kg
and drew 39 watts.1703 Laser-cooled low-temperature clocks using
Bose-Einstein condensates were expected eventually to demonstrate
∆ν / ν ~ 10-18.
In 1998, the miniaturization of rubidium AFS for space
applications was being actively studied,1704,1705 along with newer
approaches such as optically-pumped cesium AFS using solid state
diode lasers (thus eliminating the bulky magnets),1706 diode
laser-pumped rubidium AFS in which the Rb discharge lamp is
replaced with a ~100% efficient diode laser tuned to the correct
transition frequency,1707,1708 and Hg+ “optical clocks.”1709 Optical
pumping methods using diode lasers defined the NIST-7
atomic-beam standard of ∆ν / ν  5 x 10-15, starting in 1993.
A detailed analysis of micron-size atomic clocks is beyond the
scope of this book. The possibility cannot be ruled out, but in 1998
the feasibility was unknown. From Eqn. 4.50, the minimum sensor
capable of detecting a spin transition requires Nmin ~ 7 x 106 Cs
atoms (~0.001 micron3 of Cs), taking transition frequency νL =
9.192,631,770 GHz and electron spin angular momentum Lelectron
= Lproton. However, many problems must be overcome including
interactions involving spontaneous decay, measurement-induced
transitions, phase changes due to gas molecule collisions, spatial
confinement effects, the use of symmetries and cancellation of
couplings. J. Soreff [personal communication, 1998] suggests
consideration of an oscillator structure in which a phosphorus
atom is covalently bound to a tetrahedral support of carbyne rods
extending to the ends of an evacuated chamber. The fifth valence
electron on the phosphorus atom should have a hyperfine interaction
with the P31 nucleus, but it is presently unknown how tightly coupled
the thermal vibrations in the rods are to the hyperfine state transition,
since many coupling modes may vanish by symmetry.
10.1.3 Nanorobot Synchronization
Ideally, the clocks of all nanorobots present in a patient’s body
will be synchronized to some universal time. This time setting may
be defined by the patient, by the physician, or by reference to some
external standard. As part of a chronometry-critical nanorobot
installation procedure prior to infusion, an initializing signal can be
transmitted throughout the infusate volume, allowing each individual
nanorobot present therein to receive the signal and set its clock.
Acoustic synchronization pulses are appropriate if ~microsec
precision will suffice. Sound waves passing at vsound = 1500 m/sec
through an Lvial = 1.5 cm wide container of well-stirred
aqueous-suspended nanorobots restricts synchronization error to
∆terror ~ Lvial / vsound = 10 microsec; from Eqn. 10.7, repetition of
Nobs = 100 synchronization pulses can reduce synchronization
error to ~1 microsec.
For the highest pre-infusion synchronization accuracy, optical
(Section 4.7.3) or rf (Section 4.7.1) pulses will be employed. Electromagnetic energy travels at c ~ 3 x 108 m/sec across the container
volume until intercepted by a nanorobot optical sensor, giving
∆terror ~ Lvial / c = 0.05 nsec. Allowing 100 green photons (360 zJ/
photon at 550 nm) per nanorobot at a nanorobot number density
of 1012 cm-3, the flash injects ~40 J/m3 of energy into the container,
raising the water temperature by ~10 microkelvins after this energy
is fully thermalized. A 1-nsec flash produces a peak intensity of
~4 x 1010 watts/m2
, comparable to monochromatic optical tweezers
which are tolerated by biological macromolecules.1630,1631 Some
nanorobots inevitably will miss the signal and may later synchronize,
prior to infusion, via close or direct physical contact with others
who received the signal, or else multiple synchronization pulses can
be used.
Onboard nanorobot clocks can also be synchronized
post-infusion. For example, a pressure cuff inflated around the
patient’s arm can administer acoustic synchronization pulses to
~microsec precision as bloodborne nanorobots pass through the
342 Nanomedicine • Volume I
blood vessels within; after signaling for several mean blood circulation
times (e.g., a few minutes), most bloodborne nanorobots should be
properly synchronized. Whole-body acoustic transmissions at 0.1-1
MHz may be generated by operating tables, vibrating chairpads,
wristwatch transmitters and the like (Section 6.4.1). Such methods
may produce synchronization errors of ~100 microsec over 15-cm
anteroposterior path lengths, reducible to ~1 microsec error using
Nobs = 10,000 repetitions of the calibration signal (Eqn. 10.7). For
higher precision, the physician transmits ~MHz radio wave pulses
into the body; such pulses may be detected by appropriate onboard
receivers (Section 6.4.2). Such waves have only ~75% attenuation
over 15-cm anteroposterior path lengths (Eqn. 6.32), producing
0.5 nsec synchronization accuracy. Optical photons applied to the
skin surface are subject to scattering, producing signal pulse broadening which increases synchronization error, and to absorption, which
makes signal reception difficult or impossible beyond tissue depths
of a few centimeters (Section 4.9.4).
Another approach is to inject a relatively small number of
chronocytes—mobile communicytes (Section 7.2.6) modified to
include an onboard nanoclock of high precision (e.g., a portable
frequency standard) and the ability to transmit clocking synchronization signals to calibrate neighboring nanorobots. These signals
may be transmitted acoustically at close proximity to the nodes of a
mobile communications network (Section 7.3.2), subsequently
allowing all nanorobots within 100 microns of a calibrated node to
synchronize to within 67 nsec. Averaging algorithms can be
employed to synchronize uncalibrated nodes in the system that were
not recently visited by a chronocyte. Bloodborne chronocytes will
normally be carried from the capillary vasculature to within ~100
microns of most tissue locations, thus allowing 67 nsec single-pulse
acoustic synchronization even in the absence of an installed communications network (Section 7.3).
10.1.4 Dedicated Chronometer Organs
Just as the hypothalamus is the physical locus of the natural
circadian clock (Section 10.1.1), it may be convenient to establish
artificial chronometer organs inside the human body for various
purposes. Dedicated nano-organs have been described previously
in connection with power (Section 6.4.4), communication (Section
7.3.4), and navigational (Section 8.3.6) systems.
Chronometer organs, which would likely be millimeter-scale or
smaller, could be used as endogenous clocks to regulate the precise
administration of time-release substances or devices. Such organs
could serve as highly accurate timers to improve the natural human
interval timing sense from ±15% accuracy in biological systems
(Section 10.1.1) to parts per million accuracy, or better, using artificial
systems. If linked to the patient or user through various outmessaging
channels (Section 7.4.6), chronometer organs can provide a
continuously-available, consciously-accessible unfailing “time sense”
of extraordinary precision for time of day, calendar date, and other
time-related information.
Dedicated chronometer organs can be used to synchronize
chronocytes or mobile communication networks at the nodes (Section 7.3.2). For example, chronocytes with lower-stability crystal
oscillators could be repeatedly recalibrated as they passed near larger
embedded chronometer organs during each blood circulation cycle
(e.g., once per minute). Such chronometer organs might incorporate
higher-stability onboard atomic frequency standards. Alternatively,
chronometer organs could serve as transdermal data ports through
which timing synchronization signals can be injected into fiber-based
in vivo communication networks (Section 7.3.1) from external timing
sources, similar to the autoclock pulse (containing time and date
information) that is added to most contemporary television broadcast
signals. Hard connectors, centimeter-scale rf wireless antennas, and
other types of links are possible (Sections 6.4.2 and 7.2.3). In 1998,
a desk clock could be purchased for $50 that automatically
recalibrated itself by picking up WWVB radio signals anywhere in
North America, several times a night, using a few centimeters of
rod antenna.1711 WWV’s carrier frequency is regulated to ∆ν / ν
~ 5 x 10-12, ultimately providing a time synchronicity at the
receiver of ~100 microsec/day. With a slightly larger in vivo antenna,
satellite GPS signals may be received, providing 20 nanosec time
error.1711 If buildings and vehicles are rewired to permit dissemination
of time synchronization pulses and other useful information via
continuous rf or IR channels, chronometer organs could employ
smaller in vivo antennas and still achieve very precise results.
Although it has been informally speculated3025 that nanorobots
could use biological nerve fibers as rf antennas to receive electromagnetic time recalibration signals from outside the human body, such
as from WWV, this concept is probably unworkable for several
reasons. First, the axoplasm is only ~10-7 as electrically conductive
as a metal wire of equivalent size, because axoplasmic charge carrier
density and mobility are much lower than for electrons in a wire.799
Second, passively conducted axonal currents are quickly attenuated
by leakage through ion channels in the membrane, which is a very
poor insulator. From cable theory applied to neurons,799,3022 the
length constant λn is defined as the distance over which an applied
potential depolarizes to 1/e (~37%) of its maximum value; λn =
(dneuron rmem / 4 raxo)
1/2 ~ (0.04 dneuron)
1/2, where dneuron is axonal
diameter in meters, rmem is the specific membrane resistance (~0.2
ohm-m2 in human neurons) and raxo is the specific resistance of the
axoplasm (~1.25 ohm-m in human neurons). For a typical human
axon with dneuron ~ 1 micron, then λn ~ 200 microns (~internodal
distance between nodes of Ranvier) and an external signal is >99%
attenuated in ~1 mm of longitudinal travel. Third, short pulses (e.g.,
rapidly-oscillating rf signals) are severely distorted and attenuated
by the electrical capacitance of the cell membrane. The capacitive
time constant in human nerves and muscle cells ranges from 1-20
millisec,799 thus limiting any possible electromagnetic reception to
frequencies under 50-200 Hz, although pulsed microwaves directed
through the brain can induce auditory effects in animals and
humans.3473-3481
10.2 Nanocomputers
Many important medical nanorobotic tasks will require computation during the acquisition and processing of sensor data, the
control of tools, manipulators, and motility systems, navigation and
communication, and during the coordination of collective activities
with neighboring nanorobots. Ex vivo computation has few theoretical
limits, but computation by in vivo nanorobots will be subject to a
number of constraints such as physical size, power consumption,
onboard memory and processing speed.
The memory required onboard a medical nanorobot will be strongly
mission dependent. Recognizing and manipulating molecules is
fundamental. A very simple mission might demand only the identification or handling of perhaps ~10 different molecules. For example,
basic respiratory gas transport nanorobots such as respirocytes1400
(Chapter 22) may require the operation of fixed-shape receptors
that bind simple molecules such as O2, CO2, H2O, and glucose.
Identifiers for such receptors may need only a few bits, hence this
memory requirement should be negligible. A toxin removal device
(Chapter 19) similarly may require keeping track of only a few types
of fixed-shape receptors. On the other hand, a survey or assay mission
might need to recognize N = 100-1000 distinct proteins. A spherical
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 343
1-micron nanorobot can have >104 fixed-shape receptors on its
surface; if these will suffice, then we require N log2 (N) ~ 104 bits
to identify each of N = 1000 different receptor types. This seems
more efficient than using more advanced reconfigurable receptors
(Section 3.5.7.4), which might need >104 bits per receptor-pattern
to specify each binding site geometry to the necessary atomic-scale
resolution (Section 3.5.7.5), thus imposing a total memory requirement of >107 bits for an onboard library of N = 1000 different
receptor types. Consequently, simple missions involving basic process
control with limited motility may require no more than ~105
-106
bits of memory, comparable to an old Apple II computer (including
RAM plus floppy disk drive). At the other extreme, a complex cell
repair mission might require the onboard storage of a substantial
fraction of the patient’s genetic code, representing ~109 bits of
memory including perhaps ~0.2 x 109 bits of linear sequence data
for all 100,000 protein types found in the human body, again
assuming 300 amino acids per protein. (Most amino acids are folded
into the protein’s interior and are not readily accessible to surface
probing unless the protein is unfolded, which usually is not desirable
or convenient. On the other hand, binding sites for large molecules
should be physically easier to construct than small-molecule receptors;
Section 3.5.9.) An onboard memory of 109
-1010 bits would be in
the same range as the 1985 Cray-2 (2 x 1010 bits) or the 1989 Cray-3
(6 x 108
 bits) supercomputers.1
Computational speed will also be strongly mission dependent.
However, extremely simple process control systems in basic factory
settings may only require speeds as slow as 104 bit/sec (Chapter 12).
Individual natural biocomputational devices (as opposed to multiple
such biodevices operating in parallel) generally do not exceed this
speed. Examples include mRNA translation during protein manufacture at ~15 Hz (~75 bits/sec assuming 5 bits/protein);997 transcription from DNA by RNA polymerase at ~40 Hz (~80 bits/sec
at 2 bits/nucleotide);997 DNA replication at ~800 Hz (~1600 bits/
sec at 2 bits/nucleotide);997 typically 5-100 Hz (bits/sec) for neural
electrical discharges (Section 4.8.6); ~1000 Hz (bits/sec) for excitory
cholinergic synapses, and gated ion channels at ~104 Hz (bits/sec)
(Section 7.4.5.6). At the other extreme, a processing speed of 109
bits/sec allows a ~109 bit genomic information store to be processed
in ~1 sec, the small-molecule diffusion time across an average
20-micron wide cell. In 1998, personal desktop computers capable of
~109
-1010 bits/sec (~108
 operations/sec) were commonly available.
This Section describes possible nanomechanical (Section 10.2.1)
and nanoelectronic (Section 10.2.2) computers, biocomputers
(Section 10.2.3), and briefly examines the ultimate limits to computation including reversible and quantum computing (Section 10.2.4).
Computer architectural issues are not explicitly addressed here. (For
example, advanced architectures, especially large CPU systems, may
employ distributed clocks and a distributed computing network.)
10.2.1 Nanomechanical Computers
Electronic computers were evolutionarily preceded by purely
mechanical computational devices, starting with the venerable abacus
(hand-operated movable beads on rods) in ~3000 BC,1726,1727 the
Pascaline (the first hands-on algorithm-executing machine) in
1642,1728 and the Difference Engine (the first hands-off
algorithm-executing machine) designed in 1821 by Charles
Babbage.1728-1731,1744 A 2000-part working subsection of the
brass-geared Engine was demonstrated in 1832; an entire working
Difference Engine was reconstructed by historians in 1991, proving
that Babbage’s design was sound.1732 In the 1840s, Thomas Fowler
built and exhibited a calculating device using sliding rods made of
wood instead of metal.1733 Whereas Babbage’s engines used the
familiar 0-9 decimal system with each number represented by a
discrete position of a rotating gear wheel, Fowler’s machine was
more fully digital, using as its active element not rotating wheels
but sliding “trinary” rods which could occupy only one of three
positions at any time, the first known example of “rod logic.” (By
reducing the number of distinct physical states, parts could be made
less precisely.)
By 1834, Babbage had also conceived detailed plans for his
Analytical Engine, intended as a general-purpose programmable
computing machine but based entirely on 19th century mechanical
technology. The Analytical Engine was to have a random-access
memory consisting of 1000 words of 50 decimal digits each
(~175,000 bits), with separate memory and central processing unit
(CPU), stored program control, data entry via punched metal cards,
and even an output printer.1728,1730,1732 This ambitious device,
though well specified, was never built.
The mechanical computing tradition was not entirely abandoned.
Vannevar Bush built his analog mechanical computer, the Differential
Analyzer, in 1930 at MIT.1736 In 1954, M. Minsky and R. Silver289
used hydraulic logic elements to build a mechanical “hydroflip
computer” which was operated at ~30 Hz and powered by a 3-inch
high column of water. (Section 9.2.7.6 describes the basis for a
mechanical fluidic computer operating at ~5000 Hz.) In 1975,
D. Hillis and B. Silverman1738 built a special-purpose all-mechanical
computer ~2 meters in size, entirely out of Tinkertoys, and powered by
a hand crank, that was able to play tic-tac-toe. In 1990, University
of Minnesota engineers1734 fabricated a complete family of
micromechanical digital logic devices, including
electrostatically-actuated linear-sliding ~30-micron mechanical logic
elements confined to a one-dimensional track, forming NAND and
NOR gates suitable for low-speed radiation-hard digital functions
“in environments hostile to electronic devices.” Sandia’s pin-in-maze
microlocks2356 could also be used to make a mechanical computer,
albeit at the above-micron scale. In 1996, J. Gimzewski and colleagues1735 at IBM Zurich used a scanning tunneling microscope
(STM) probe to repeatedly reposition spherical C60 fullerene molecules
~1 nm in diameter along a terraced copper substrate that constrained
the buckyballs to move only in a straight line, operating the
mechanical array like beads on an abacus. In 1997, Stoddart’s
group2540 described a mechanical XOR gate based on their
“molecular shuttles.”
Perhaps the best-characterized (though not yet built) mechanical
nanocomputer is Drexler’s rod logic design.10,2282 In this design, one
sliding rod with a knob intersects a second knobbed sliding rod at
right angles to the first. Depending upon the position of the first
rod, the second may be free to move, or unable to move. This simple
blocking interaction serves as the basis for logical operations. Figure
10.1 shows a nanomechanical implementation of a Boolean NAND
“interlock” gate, using clock-driven input and output logic rods 1
nm wide which interact via knobs that prevent or enable motion,
all encased in a housing, allowing ~16 nm3
/interlock. (Any logic
function, no matter how complicated, can be built from NAND or
NOR gates alone.1736) Figure 10.2 is an exploded diagram of the
moving parts of a thermodynamically efficient class of register
capable of mechanical data storage, using rods ~1 nm in width with
0.1-nanosec switching speeds, allowing ~40 nm3
/register. The
activity sequence depicts a simplified version of Drexler’s register,
omitting the reading mechanism.1743 Initially the register shows a 0
(black ball position in A) or a 1 (B). Then the barrier is lowered and
the ball wanders freely (C); entropy increases. The register is then
reset to 0 by spring-rod compression, converting ~kT ln(2) joules
of work into heat (D). To write a 0, the barrier is raised (E). To write
344 Nanomedicine • Volume I
a 1, the input rod at right is first extended and then the barrier is
raised (F); the input rod does work compressing the ball into the
spring, but this energy can be retrieved when the spring rod is
retracted. Finally, the spring rod is retracted, returning the device to
state (A) or (B).
Figure 10.3 illustrates a programmable logic array (PLA) using
knobbed rods (omitting several drive and spring systems for clarity)
to implement nanomechanical logic, which, in combination with
rod-based registers, can be used to build much of the control circuitry
for a CPU in a 1 GHz clocked computer system. For details of
operation, see Drexler.10 While a PLA system requires three successive
rod displacement cycles to compute a set of Boolean functions, the
functions AND, OR, and NOT can also be computed in a single
displacement cycle by employing a linkage in which any input rod
can displace the output rod without displacing any other input rod;
Figure 10.4 illustrates this alternative approach for an
asynchronous-input OR gate.
Drexler’s benchmark mechanical nanocomputer design has 106
interlock gates, 105 logic rods, 104 registers, an energy-buffering
flywheel and other components with total cubic volume (~400 nm)3
,
mass ~10-16 kg, and total power ~ 60 nW, giving a power density of
~1012 watts/m3
.
10 Power dissipation per logic operation is ~0.013
zJ per gate per cycle, giving (including register dissipation) ~2 x 104
operations/sec-pW.10 Processing speed is ~109 operations/sec (~1
gigaflop) or ~1028 operations/sec-m3
; assuming one bit per register,
processing speed is ~1013 bits/sec or ~1032 bits/sec-m3
. In 1998,
the typical desktop PC operated at ~108 operations/sec. Cooling
is provided by a refrigerant fluid flowing through an integral fractal
plumbing system at near the speed of sound.10
The most primitive 4-bit Intel 4004 microprocessor, introduced in
1971 for early-generation pocket calculators, had 2300 transistors. A
comparably simple early mechanical nanocomputer with 2000
interlock gates, 100 registers, and a 1 KHz clock speed could have a
volume as small as 36,000 nm3
, a (~33 nm)3 cube, assuming 16
nm3
/gate and 40 nm3
/register, and could process ~105
 bits/sec.
One major disadvantage of mechanical nanocomputers is that
they will almost certainly be slower than nanoelectronic systems,
Fig. 10.1. Schematic of nanomechanical rod logic NAND gate
(modified from Drexler10).
Fig. 10.2. Schematic of nanomechanical rod logic data storage registers
(modified from Drexler10 and Hall1743).
Fig. 10.3. Schematic of programmable logic array (PLA) finite state
machine implementing rod logic for a nanomechanical central
processing unit (modified from Drexler10).
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 345
because a device that depends on moving heavy nuclei (~10-27 kg)
will necessarily be slower than a device that depends on moving
less-massive electrons (~10-30 kg).280 Mechanical signals travel near
the speed of sound (~104 m/sec in diamond), whereas electronic
signals may travel near the speed of light (~108 m/sec). Thus while
nanomechanical computers may be limited to switching speeds of
~50 picoseconds, electronic devices may be ~103
-104 times faster.
On the other hand, mechanical computers are more EMP (electromagnetic pulse) resistant, conceptually easier to understand and to
model, and mechanical designs scale readily from the macroscale to
the nanoscale, unlike most nanoelectronic designs. In 1996, a ~50
nm reversible mechanical latch was fabricated and physically cycled
using an AFM; the similarity to Drexler’s mechanical OR gate (Figure
10.4) was explicitly noted in the paper.1737
What about mechanical data storage? In the MEMS world,
Halg1742 fabricated a nonvolatile microelectromechanical memory
cell consisting of a longitudinally-stressed surface-micromachined
~10 micron bridge that mechanically buckles into one of two states,
making a bistable storage device. Moving to the nanoscale, data
could be mechanically stored using compact three-dimensional
arrays of diamondoid register rods (~107 bits/micron3
, ~1010 bits/
sec access speed; Figure 10.2, Section 7.2.6, and Drexler10). Another
theoretical mechanical storage medium is spooled hydrofluorocarbon
memory tape (~1010 bits/micron3
, ~109 bits/sec access speed; Sections
7.2.1.1 and 7.2.6 and Drexler10), or polymer or diamond
surface-bound patterns of H and F atoms that could be read using
an optimized (CH3)3PO scanning probe tip with a maximum raw
error rate of 6 x 10-8 per read.1200 (Linear DNA molecules achieve
~109 bits/micron3 data storage, by comparison.) Direct AFM reading
and recording of 10-nm pits on a polycarbonate surface (~106
bits/micron2
, up to ~107 bits/sec access speed)1739 and other means
of directly reading and writing data at the atomic level1749,2182 have
been studied, and the fullerene abacus1735 described earlier is one of
the first experimental efforts to mechanically store numerical
information using individual molecules at room temperature.
It has been speculated that individual atoms or atomic vacancies
could serve as information units.278,1200,1739,1745,2711 For example,
Y. Mo1741 used an STM to store information in the reversible
rotational states of individual antimony dimers deposited on a silicon
substrate. In theory, a block of diamond with data encoded as
single-atom lattice vacancies could store up to ~176 bits/nm3
, or
nearly ~2 x 1011 bits/micron3
, although cryogenic temperatures
might be required to reduce diffusion effects and structural lability
to acceptable levels consistent with long-term information storage.
Phonon probes or other nondestructive means of lattice interrogation
could be employed for readout.
10.2.2 Nanoelectronic Computers
In 1998, the metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor
(MOSFET) was still the most common type of transistor in general
use. These solid-state devices are characterized by an electrical source,
an electrical drain, and a gate that controls the flow. Since its inception,
the FET has scaled well to lower sizes. Individual working transistors
with 40-nm gate lengths have been demonstrated in silicon,1751 and
25-nm gate-length transistors have been fabricated in gallium
arsenide.1752 However, as feature sizes shrink below 100 nm, a
number of obstacles to stable operation begin to appear and the
cost-effective downscaling of dense circuitry may not persist.1753-1757
A number of solid-state replacements for the bulk-effect semiconductor transistor have been suggested that could overcome these
obstacles by taking advantage of nanometer-scale quantum mechanical
effects.1813 Such replacements include quantum dots (QDs),1784-1787
resonant tunneling devices (RTDs),1787-1791,1747 electron turnstiles,2709
and single-electron transistors (SETs).1794-1799,1855 However, while
hybrid RTD-FET circuits1791 and SETs1814,1815 have been successfully
switched at room temperature, many of these devices must be
operated at cryogenic temperatures1830 and other practical challenges
remain;1747,1784,1791-1794 such top-down approaches to
nanoelectronics are not considered further here.
In contrast, molecular nanoelectronics uses primarily covalently
bonded molecular structures, electrically isolated from a bulk substrate,
producing wires, switches and devices composed of individual
molecules and nanometer-scale supramolecular structures.1747 While
it is relatively difficult and expensive to sculpt trillions of identical
nanoscale structures in bulk materials (e.g., using 2-nm resolution
electron-beam lithographic techniques1816), individual molecules are
natural nanometer-scale structures that can be manufactured to be
exactly the same in near-mole quantities.1867The great versatility of
organic chemistry offers more options for designing and fabricating
nanoelectronic devices than are available in silicon.1773-1778 Investigators are designing, modeling, fabricating, and testing individual
molecules1760-1769,1871 and nanometer-scale supramolecular structures1811,1817 that act as electrical switches and even exhibit some
of the same properties as small solid-state transistors.1768 For
example, three- and four- terminal devices with ~0.3-nm feature sizes
have been examined computationally.1879
Molecular electronics is a rapidly growing area in the literature.1769-1776,1832,1924 J.M. Tour expects experimental demonstration
of molecular-sized transistor devices by 2000-2001, and commercial
high-level computers using molecular electronics by 2008-2013.1517
A current list of major research groups is maintained by the
International Society for Molecular Electronics and Biocomputing.
Some of the following discussion is appreciatively drawn from an
extensive 1997 review by MITRE Corporation.1747
10.2.2.1 Molecular Wires
Before one can seriously discuss molecular electronic devices
embedded in single molecules, it must be asked whether a small
single molecule can be made to conduct electrical current at all. A
Fig. 10.4. Schematic diagram of a single displacement cycle asynchronous-input nanomechanical OR gate (redrawn from Drexler10).
346 Nanomedicine • Volume I
series of difficult and sensitive experiments1765,1767,1800 and theoretical
investigations1758-1761 during the 1990s answered this question
affirmatively. Single molecule conduction was demonstrated by
Tour1766,1767 using a conducting molecule characterized by repeating
structures—in this case, a series of benzene-like rings connected by
acetylene linkages—each part of which is linked to the next by
bonds including many π-electrons above and below the plane of
the structure. These electrons in the π orbitals1818 conjugate with
each other, or interact, to form a single large orbital throughout the
length of the wire to permit mobile electrons to flow.1778,1831 Thiol
(-SH) functional groups at either end adsorb well to gold surfaces
and act as “alligator clips” for attaching molecular electronic units
to metal substrates.1819,1764,1867-1870 Tour’s polyphenylene wires can
carry ~nanoampere currents. Such molecular wires also have the
desirable property that they can be made quite long, if necessary,
because they can be lengthened systematically using chemosynthetic
methods.1766,1820 Another experiment using a single benzene ring
attached between two gold electrodes through thiol groups across a
0.846-nm gap found a single-ring threshold resistance of ~20
megohm and a capacitance on the order of ~0.1 e2 / kT ~ 10-19
farad.1811,1812,1837
Fullerene carbon nanotubes (Section 2.3.2) or “buckytubes”1821
are hollow cylindrical tubes, essentially rolled-up sheets of graphite,
measuring 1 nm in diameter that (in many chiral and compositional forms; Section 10.2.2.4) can conduct electricity. For instance,
both individual 10-20 nm diameter carbon nanotubes1822,1844 and
atomic wires pulled from an unraveling carbon nanotube643 can
conduct currents of ~1-10 microamps (vs. nanoamps via tunneling). Maximum nanotube current density is ~1010-1011 amp/m2
over a 0.2-6.0 volt range,1844,1857 superior to the ~109 amp/m2 typically achieved in superconductors. Nanotube resistivity measures
~8-20 ohm-m for straight tubes, ~38-49 ohm-m for slightly curved
(5-30˚) tubes, and >100 ohm-m for highly curved (65-80˚) tubes.1844
Interestingly, electronic transport in carbon nanotubes is ballistic (e.g.,
like electron waveguides, permitting only a few propagating
modes1308), with all waste heat being dissipated in the leads to the
nanotube element and none in the nanotube itself.1857 Buckytubes
are stiff enough to serve as supports for molecular circuit elements,
and if filled with conducting metal can create one of the structurally strongest nanowires that is chemically possible. (See also Section 10.2.2.4.)
Other 0.6-3 nm molecular wires,1767,1801,1802,1864 3-20 nm
semiconductor wires,1843 and nanoscale metallic wires1740,1862,1863
have been studied as well.
10.2.2.2 Electromechanical Molecular Switching Devices
In 1998, the best-studied category of molecular electronics
device is probably the electromechanical molecular switch. This class
of switch employs electrically or mechanically applied forces to turn
a current on and off, either by changing the conformation of the
molecule1768 or by moving a switching molecule or group of atoms
in the manner of a gate.1805,1806 These switches are promising
because they could be laid down in a dense network on a solid
substrate, or in some cases in three-dimensional arrays; unfortunately,
no integrated CPU-scale designs have yet been attempted, although
plans for a half-adder1769 and a molecular shift register1750 have been
published. Some examples:
A. Electromechanical Amplifier — Joachim and Gimzewski1768
measured conductance through a single buckyball held between an
STM tip and a conducting substrate. By pressing down harder on
the STM tip, the buckyball deforms, tuning the conduction
off-resonance and reducing current ~50%. Although the STM tip
could be replaced with a small in-situ piezoelectric gate, the ideal
actuator would be a molecular-scale electromechanical actuator akin
to a logic rod; the major fundamental limit to the speed of this
switch is the natural mechanical vibrational resonance frequencies
of a buckyball, ~1013 Hz.
B. Linear Atomic Relay — Researchers at Hitachi Corporation1823
simulated a two-state electronic switch wherein a mobile atom that
is not firmly attached to a substrate moves back and forth between
two terminals (Figure 10.5). If the switching atom is in place, the
device conducts electricity; if the switching atom is displaced from
the two wires, the resulting gap greatly reduces the current that can
flow through the atom wire. A small negative charge placed on the
third atom wire “gate” near the switching atom moves the switching
atom out of its place in the wire; the switching atom is pulled back
into place by a second “reset” gate after each use of the switch.
Actual experiments approximating this design created a bistable atom
switch using a xenon switching atom moving back and forth
between an STM tip and a substrate,1807,1808 demonstrating that
the movement of a single atom can be the basis of a nanometer-scale
switch. In a more mature device, relays could be ~10 nm2 in size
with a speed limited only by the intrinsic vibrational frequency of
atoms, typically ~100 THz, but it seems likely that atom relays could
only operate at very low temperatures because not much energy
would be required to evaporate a switching atom off the substrate
and out of the plane of the atom wires, destroying the switch.1747
C. Rotational Molecular Relay — A more reliable two-state
device based on atom movement uses the rotation of a molecular
group to affect an electric current. The switching atom is part of a
rotating group, or “rotamer,”1824 which itself is part of a larger
molecule, perhaps affixed to the same surface as the atom wires.
Figure 10.6 is a conceptual diagram illustrating this approach,1747
wherein the electric field of a nearby gate forces the switching atom
to rotate in or out of the atom wire. When the switching atom is
“in,” wire conductance is high and the switch is “on”; when the
switching atom is “out,” a second group takes its place, hindering
current flow and turning the switch “off.” A third large group may
provide resistance to thermal free rotation. Alternatively, hydrogen
bonding might provide enough rotational resistance to stop the
rotamer in the conducting position, but not so much that reversing
the gate voltage would be insufficient to turn the rotamer. Controlled
rotational state switching of a Pt-adsorbed oxygen molecule by STM
using 0.15-volt 20-microsec pulses was demonstrated in 1998.1874
While a rotating switch with a methyl-like rotamer group has
three distinct switch positions, a hinging switch that rotates back
Fig. 10.5. Linear atomic relay switch.1747
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 347
and forth between two distinct states might be preferable.
Cyclohexane, a simple example of this kind of molecule, can bend
into two different forms, commonly known at the “boat” and “chair”
conformations.1809,1810 As shown schematically in Figure 10.7, a
voltage on a nearby gate might force the cyclohexane switch into
one of its two conformations, affecting the conductivity of a nearby
atom wire. The cyclohexane-type molecule attaches to a molecular
framework while the remaining ring carbons are replaced by groups
tailored to use steric repulsions or van der Waals attractions to
reduce undesired switching caused by thermal energy. Switch speed
is limited by molecular rotational and torsional frequencies, typically
~1-1000 GHz, which is slower than the atom relay but more reliable.
Also in contrast to the atom relay, molecular relays could be packed
in three dimensions, possibly up to ~1 nm-3 densities.
D. Molecular Shuttle Switch — A rotaxane “shuttle switch” has
been synthesized by F. Stoddart’s group1805 that consists of one
ring-shaped molecule that encircles and slides along a shaft-like chain
molecule (Figure 10.8). Two large terminal groups at
either end of the shaft prevent the shuttle ring from slipping off the
shaft. The shaft contains two other functional groups, a biphenol
group and a benzidine group, that serve as natural stations between
which the shuttle moves. The shuttle molecule contains four positively charged functional groups that cause it to be attracted to shaft
sites with extra negative change, so the shuttle spends 84% of its
time at the benzidine station, which is a better electron donor than
the biphenol station. Removing an electron from the benzidine station forces the shuttle to switch to the other station; switching may
be controlled chemically or electrochemically.1805 A charged gate
could be added at one or both ends to force the shuttle to move
between stations, with switch state probed by arranging for the ring
to complete an electric circuit in one of its two positions.1747 Switching speed is slow, limited by the speed of electron transfer to and
from the benzidine station and the sluggish motion of the ring which
is ~106
 times heavier than an electron, but three-dimensional packing
densities of ~0.01 nm-3 appear plausible. Other rotaxane shuttle
systems have been studied.1845,1846,2487,2522,2529,2530 In 1999, the first
chemically-assembled rotaxane-based logic gate was demonstrated,3541 although the gates could be opened only irreversibly.
10.2.2.3 Field-Controlled Molecular Switching Devices
A second category of molecular electronics device that appears
promising for the development of molecular nanoelectronic digital
computers is the electric-field controlled molecular switching
devices, including molecular quantum-effect devices. These are most
closely descended from the solid-state microelectronics and
nanoelectronic devices described earlier, and promise to be the fastest
and most densely integrated among all of the current alternatives. A
group at Purdue University has used self-assembly to fabricate and
demonstrate functioning arrays of molecular electronic quantum
confinement structures connected by molecular wires.1811,1812 As
another example, J.M. Tour proposes embedding a quantum well
in a molecular wire by inserting pairs of barrier groups that break
the sequence of conjugated π-orbitals (Figure 10.9), forming a
two-terminal molecular RTD;1747 other structures for three-terminal
molecules have been suggested.1825 (In February 1999, Tour reported
the demonstration of RTD effects in the manner proposed above;
at press time, the paper was still in review [J.M. Tour, personal
communication, 1999].) Nondissipative (adiabatic) Thouless electron
pumping has also been described at 0.33 K.3189
Merkle and Drexler1097 consider a hypothetical “helical logic”
device in which a single electron can switch another single electron,
Fig. 10.6. Rotational molecular relay switch.1747
Fig. 10.7. Hinging molecular relay switch.1747
Fig. 10.8. Molecular shuttle switch.1747
Fig. 10.9. Two-terminal molecular resonant tunneling device
(RTD).1747 Proposed RTD: Insulating barrier groups generate a
potential well for quantum confinement, creating a resonant tunneling
effect when molecule is subjected to voltage bias, permitting a current
of electrons to be transmitted through the device.
348 Nanomedicine • Volume I
with 1 or 0 represented as the presence or absence of individual
electrons. The electrons are constrained to move along helical paths,
driven by a rotating immersive electric field (normal to the helical
axis) that confines each charge carrier to a fraction of a turn of a
single helical loop, moving it like water in an Archimedean screw. A
logic operation involves two helices, one of which splits into two
“descendant” helices. At the point of divergence, differences in the
electrostatic potential resulting from the presence or absence of a
carrier in the adjacent helix control the direction taken by a carrier
in the splitting helix; the sequence is reversible, allowing two initially
distinct helical paths to merge into a single outgoing helical path
without forcing a dissipative transition. Energy dissipation at ~10
GHz is ~10-6 zJ/gate-cycle at an operating temperature of 1 K.
10.2.2.4 Other Molecular Electronic Devices
Other classes of molecular electronic devices have been studied,
including picosecond photoactive or photochromic molecular
switching devices1777-1783,1835,1836 using light, and electrochemical
molecular devices1803,1805 using electrochemical reactions, to change
the shape, orientation, or electron configuration of a molecule in
order to switch a current. However, photoactive devices in a dense
network would require an NSOM-like emitter (Section 4.8.4) to
switch individually, since optical photon pathways are not easily
confined at length scales very much below optical wavelengths of
~500-1000 nm; electrochemical molecular devices might require
immersion in solvent to operate.1747
Fullerenes exhibit a wide range of quantized conductivities that
may be useful in nanoelectronic computers.1821,2120 For example,
chemisorption alters properties: 3 alkali dopant atoms per C60
buckyball gives high conductivity, while none or 6 dopant atoms
gives an insulator.1826 Buckytube conductivity also varies with
mechanical stress and torsion,1844,1872 tube diameter, and other
geometrical parameters.1852-1854,1821 Depending upon the direction
of the nanotube chiral vector, carbon nanotubes may be either
metallic or semiconducting.1847,1848 Suitably-sized, doped, flexed,
stressed, or chiralized fullerenes could be nested to make insulated
wires1829 or joined to make nanoelectronic computer components1821,1858-1861,1876-1878 including resistors with quantized “staircase”
resistance of nh/2e2
, n = 1, 2, ... (e is electronic charge, h is Planck’s
constant),1857 two-terminal devices such as diodes,1838,1873 threeor four-terminal devices such as heterojunction,1828,1849,1858
TUBEFET,1875 or thin-film1827 transistors, and gates that introduce
electric fields.641,1850 A single-molecule transistor using semiconducting buckytubes has been demonstrated experimentally at
room temperature.2276
Carbon nanotubes have been cut to length, size-sorted by field
flow fractionation, their open ends derivatized with thiol groups
and then tethered to 10-nm gold particle “junction boxes” which AFM
images show can connect together at least two separate
tubes.1525,2713 If the tethering process can be spatially controlled
using DNA complementarity (Section 10.2.3) or by other means,
then fullerene nanoelectronic circuit elements could be
assembled into three-dimensional CPU-like structures. P. Collins1873
expects an all-carbon 8-bit adder with nanometer dimensions by
the year 2002, and J.C. Ellenbogen of MITRE Corp. has designed
a molecular half-adder that measures ~10 nm x 10 nm in size.2275
This research area was extremely active in 1998.
Fullerenes may also allow compact memory devices. For example,
it has long been speculated that a ~1 nm buckyball encapsulated in
a ~1 nm diameter nanotube segment may glide freely back and forth,
trapped weakly in each end cap by van der Waals forces. An external
voltage could nudge a charged C60 molecule to one end of the other,
creating a two-state “buckyshuttle RAM” storage device.1308,2849
Such a device could store one bit of information in a ~10 nm3 volume,
a storage density of ~108 bits/micron3
; the C60 thermal velocity of ~100
m/sec at 310 K inside a ~10 nm memory element gives a typical
read/write time of ~0.1 nanosec. In early 1999, Kwon and colleagues2951
reported that finely dispersed 4-6 nm diamond powder thermally
annealed by heating in a graphite crucible under argon at 1800˚C
for 1 hour produced oblong multiwall carbon nanostructures which
in some cases could move around inside each other, like C60 trapped
within C480. Kwon noted that there are potential energy minima at
either end, so a charged buckyball (e.g., an enclosed ion) could be
shuttled with an applied electric field, which could be used for
memory storage. Computational simulation of writing a bit showed
that the interior buckyball neatly shuttled to the correct end, then
gently bounced to rest in ~0.01 nanosec (i.e., ~100 GHz operation)
dissipating only ~10 kT in the C480. Kwon proposed a high density
memory board using aligned buckyshuttles in a hexagonal lattice
with addressing wires above and below, not unlike a ferrite core memory;
the memory would likely be nonvolatile at room temperature, with
mass production based on self-assembly.
10.2.2.5 Molecular Electrostatic Field Computers
In 1998, bulk semiconductor technology typically required
~16,000 electrons to transfer one bit of information.1981 SET and
related techniques described above promise to reduce this to ~1
electron per bit. But a “traditional” molecular electronics
nanocomputer with a mean gate density of ~1 nm-3 operating at
~10 GHz and using single electrons to transport, indicate, fetch, or
represent a binary digit would move ~1 coul/sec of electrons (~1
amp at ~1 volt, or ~1 watt) through a 1 micron3 CPU, producing
an untenable ~1018 watt/m3 power density, compared to ~1012 watts/
m3
 for the nanomechanical CPU described in Section 10.2.1.
In order to reclaim this factor of 106
, Tour and Seminario1879,1981
conclude that a molecular CPU must operate by electrostatic
interactions rather than by electron currents, using intermolecular
“talk” to efficiently transfer a bit using only ~10-6 electron.1517 This
charge-density approach is already well-known in biology, where
enzyme-ligand recognition is mediated by hydrogen bonding or van
der Waals interactions, working through the electric fields of the
molecules even though no formal charge transfer occurs. Similarly,
in an electrostatic nanocomputer the input signal is initiated by
bringing up a charge to one end of the molecular device, thus
reshaping the local charge density. That molecular device, in turn,
perturbs the electrostatic field of an adjacent molecular device,
rearranging its electron density in <10-15 sec,1981 and so the electrostatic field perturbation is propagated without charge transfer: “These
movements of electrons (wave-particle entities) in the molecular
orbitals (or circuits) are performed without any dissipation of
energy (stationary states).”1981 Perturbation pulses may have an
energy magnitude similar to those of van der Waals interactions
(Section 3.5.1). The hypothetical electrostatic molecular logic
device shown in Figure 10.10 serves as an OR gate if the output is
active (as a potential) or as a NOR gate if the output is passive (as
an impedance) if positive logic is used, or an AND or NAND gate
if negative logic is used.1879
Gates at input/output interfaces must still be able to receive or
to drive signals from standard electronic circuits, but the vast
majority of molecular gates would lie within the molecular CPU
and could process information by controllably affecting the electrostatic potential of neighboring molecules. Such devices would likely
shift the hardware/software equilibrium towards hardware, with
massively wired-logic supplanting programmed-logic computing,
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 349
and with large molecular arrays allowing computation to take place
inside the CPU with minimal need for main or auxiliary memories.1981
Tour expects the first laboratory demonstration of electrostatic field
information transfer by 2001-2003.1517 J.C. Ellenbogen [personal
communication, 1998] notes that a charge density nanocomputer
achieves low dissipation by operating very close to equilibrium at
all times, but notes that clock speeds of at least 1-10 KHz should
still be obtainable with this approach; Tour [personal communication,
1999] claims that 1-10 THz switching is possible. Current-free
polarization gates have also been proposed3216 and fabricated.3217
10.2.3 Biocomputers
Biocomputers use natural organic materials, thus offer the
possibility of self-assembly or construction by natural or engineered
biological organisms. At least three classes of biocomputers are distinguishable—biochemical, biomechanical, and bioelectronic.
10.2.3.1 Biochemical Computers
The Systron-Donner Analog Computer familiar to engineering
students in the 1960s and 1970s used potentiometers and high-gain
DC amplifiers, called operational amplifiers, to allow the creation
of electrical circuits comprised of adders, multipliers, and integrators
arranged in feedback loops capable of solving complex
time-dependent differential equations modeling actual physical systems.
In 1998, Motorola and others were producing programmable analog
chips containing arrays of operational amplifiers and other analog
components. Related control systems are commonplace in human
physiology.71
Biochemical feedback loops exemplified by enzyme activity in
the living cell exhibit similar analog computational functionality.2695,3509,3543,3544 To start with, the net flow of carbon through an
enzyme-catalyzed reaction may be influenced by
1. the absolute quantity of enzyme present,
2. the pool of nonenzyme reactants and products available, and
3. the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme.996
All three influences may themselves be subject to recursive enzymatic
control. For instance, the absolute quantity of enzyme present is
determined by competing rates of synthesis and degradation; both
of these processes are controlled by other enzymes. Product synthesis
may be triggered by an inducer, or may be repressed by an end product.
Local concentrations of coenzymes or metal ions can regulate catalytic
efficiency. Inhibited activity of an enzyme in a biosynthetic pathway
by an end product of that pathway, such as the much-studied
inhibition of aspartate transcarbamoylase by cytidine triphosphate
(CTP),3689-3691 is called feedback inhibition.3689-3693Typically the feedback inhibitor, acting as a negative allosteric effector, binds to
the sensitive enzyme at an allosteric site that is spatially distinct
from the catalytic site. Further fine control is provided by additional
multiple feedback loops, exhibiting such features as cumulative feedback inhibition (e.g., the inhibitory effect of two or more end products
on a single regulatory enzyme is strictly additive),3694-3696 multivalent
feedback inhibition (e.g., complete inhibition occurs only when two or
more end products both are present in excess),3697,3698 and cooperative
feedback inhibition (e.g., single end product present in excess
inhibits the enzyme, but inhibitory effect of two or more end products
present in excess is “multiplicative”).3699,3700 Similarly, parallel
chemical computers consisting of open, bistable coupled reaction
systems3542 capable of pattern storage and pattern recognition have
been proposed and simulated to model a neural network,1911 and
experiments have been performed with a system of 16 coupled
bistable chemical oscillators using the chlorite-iodide reaction.1912
Networks of interacting enzymatic reactivities can also be used
to create biochemical digital computers.2851 An enzymatic Turing
machine was first proposed by C.H. Bennett,296 and Liberman3471
described the living cell as an analog-digital molecular stochastic
parallel computer. More recently, T. Knight of the MIT Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory suggested that normal cellular activities can
be co-opted to implement digital logic gates, a process he calls “cellular
gate technology.”1962,3544 In this scheme, protein concentrations are
used as binary signals. The signal is “1” if the marker protein is
being synthesized, thus reaching some detectable threshold equilibrium value where the rates of synthesis and degradation are equal.
The signal is “0” if the synthesis of the marker protein is being
inhibited by some other protein, and thus the concentration is
trending toward zero.
This principle may be used to make logical circuit elements. For
example, an inverter system consists of two different proteins, one
of which is inhibiting the synthesis of the other. A NOR gate
requires a system in which either of two proteins can inhibit the
synthesis of a third protein; multivalent feedback inhibition in which
two proteins are both required to inhibit production of a third makes
a NAND gate. This is sufficient to implement any Boolean function,
given enough gates and signals. Two NORs crossed in a loop makes
a bistable multivibrator, or flip-flop, a fundamental component in
data registers, shift registers, rectangular pulse generators, or pulse
delay elements. The logic circuitry (the arrangement of “gates” and
Fig. 10.10. Molecular electrostatic logic device (modified from Tour,
Kozaki and Seminario1879).
350 Nanomedicine • Volume I
“wires”) comprises a set of designed DNA sequences that determine
which proteins are being synthesized and which combinations of
proteins can inhibit the synthesis of others.
In the most optimistic case, we assume operation near concentrations of cprot ~ 10-4 gm/cm3 (similar to most complement
factors and some clotting factors in human blood; Appendix B),
marker proteins and gating enzymes of mass MWprot ~ 10
kilodaltons, and a minimum of Nprot ~ 100 protein molecules per
gate, giving a typical logic element size of Vgate ~ Nprot MWprot / NA
cprot ~ 0.02 micron3
/gate where NA is Avogadro’s number. Flip-flop
registers may store ~50 bits/micron3
. In theory, the DNA specifications for this computer could be grafted onto the genome of an
animal cell (~20 micron3 = up to 1000 gate volumes) or a bacterial
cell (~2 micron3 = up to 100 gate volumes), taking care to avoid any
unwanted interactions with natural biochemical pathways. Minimum
diffusion-limited gating time across a biochemical gate of characteristic dimension ∆X ~ Vgate
1/3 is given by Eqn. 9.80 as τ = ∆X2 / 2
D~ 0.3 millisec assuming protein marker diffusivity
D~ 10-10 m2
/sec (Table 3-3), consistent with ~KHz maximum
operating frequencies when DNA is localized near the gates. For
nucleoplasmic DNA with cytoplasmic computation,
diffusion-limited maximum switching frequency falls to ~0.1-1 Hz.
For comparison with natural systems, genes controlling the
fibroblast cell proliferation program have been observed to switch
states in ~900 sec,2683 implying computation at ~0.001 Hz.
Other classes of biochemically-modulated biomolecular switches
have been investigated. For example, Matthews1929 incorporated an
artificial molecular on-off switch into an enzyme by adding a pair
of thiol groups into the active site of native lysozyme, replacing two
amino acids on opposite side of the active site with cysteine, an
amino acid with a thiol-containing side chain. Thiols may form
covalent bridges (-SS-) or broken bridges (-SH HS-) under suitable
chemical conditions. Cycling the solution composition causes the
cysteines to form a bridge across the active site (inactivating the
enzyme) or to break the bridge (activating the enzyme); the process
is completely reversible. Another experiment1930 involved genetic
modification to the bacterial phage lambda, a virus with two
behavioral states called lytic (replication-active) and lysogenic
(replication-inactive). The NIH researchers installed a synthetic
molecular switch1976 in lambda that allows the virus to be biochemically toggled between its lysogenic and lytic phases by the
introduction of active HIV-1 protease. The genetic circuit that
controls the phage lambda lysis-lysogeny decision has been
flowcharted in detail using Boolean logic operators.223 The immunological synapse3453—the specialized junction between a T cell and
an antigen-presenting cell—acts as a kind of biochemical logic gate
with a ~0.06 Hz switching rate.3453-3455
In 1998, the DNA molecule also was being actively investigated
for biochemical computers. DNA-based Turing machines were first
proposed by C.H. Bennett and R. Landauer.296,1894 In 1994,
L. Adelman demonstrated the first DNA computer1895,1896 using
fragments of DNA to compute the solution to a simple graph theory
problem. Adleman used short DNA sequences to represent vertices
of a network, or graph. Combinations of these sequences were then
synthesized randomly by massively parallel chemical reactions in
aqueous solution using a combination of the copying and combination reactions applied to the artificial DNA strands, comprising
all possible random paths through the graph, after which a sequence
representing the designed result was biochemically extracted from
the stew.
Initially it was thought that DNA computing would be limited
to the solution of combinatorial problems,1897 but subsequent
research has shown that the approach can be applied to a much
wider class of digital computations.1898-1902 The well-known problem
of combinatorial explosion (e.g., even a small protein of 300 amino
acids has a sequence space of 10390) leading to huge-volume DNA
libraries during a complex computation may be avoided using a
recursive selection approach1899 crudely analogous to genetic algorithms.
Some work has been done using plasmids and restriction endonucleases to implement a DNA-based Turing machine, using only
commercially available restriction enzymes and ligases for every
operation with states represented as sequences of bases around a
plasmid,1886 and Warren Smith has another Turing machine design
using the chemistry of guide RNAs in Trypanosome kinetoplasts.3701
Practical challenges include finding fast, efficient, and low-noise
input and output techniques.1902,2331
DNA computation is in theory energetically efficient, requiring
only ~12 kT per ligation operation at room temperature, with
massively parallel operations although each ligation reaction requires
~1 sec to complete.1896 DNA data representation allows up to
~1 bit/nm3 storage density.1895 However, a practical mass storage
device would probably require 10-100 nucleotide-long words to
avoid ambiguities during the recall process,1903 thus reducing
maximum density to 107
-108 bits/micron3
, though of course some
of this reduction could be offset by reducing read rate requirements
(e.g., by using multiple read heads with majority logic).
10.2.3.2 Biomechanical Computers
Components of mechanical computers could be constructed
entirely of biologically-derived materials which in theory might be
fabricated using synthesis pathways accessible to engineered
microbiota. For example, Drexler’s mechanical nanocomputer 10
assumes diamondoid logic rods with a Young’s modulus of E = 5 x 1011
N/m2
, but the Young’s modulus for human bone hydroxyapatite and
fluoroapatite crystals is almost as high, with E ~ 1-2 x 1011 N/m2
(Table 9.3). Ignoring the significant problems inherent in
noneutactic rod logic systems, apatite-based mechanical computer
structures might be laid down using engineered osteocytes, perhaps
assisted by chemotactic or contact guidance techniques. Failure
strength of apatites is ~100 times poorer than for diamond, so apatite
logic rod force and acceleration should be reduced by ~100 and rod
vibrational energy by ~104
, increasing minimum switching time by
a factor of ~10 (to ~1 nanosec) and decreasing maximum rod speed
to ~1 m/sec.
N. Seeman has constructed molecular building blocks from
unusual DNA motifs (Section 2.3.1), using stable-branched DNA
molecules with the connectivity of a cube1914 or a truncated octahedron.1915 E. Winfree1919 has proposed using arrays of DNA crossover
molecules1920 in DNA-based computing, requiring the ability to
build periodic backbones with bases differing from one unit cell to
another. In addition to branching topology, DNA also allows control
of linking topology. DNA-based topological control has led to the
construction of Borromean rings which could be used in DNA-based
computing applications.1916-1918 In Borromean rings, the linkage
between any pair of rings disappears in the absence of the third.
Rings can be designed with an arbitrary number of circles; the
integrity of a link could represent the truth of each of a group of
logical statements.1916
DNA structural transitions could be used to drive
nanomechanical devices via branch migration.1916 Application of
torque to a cruciform leads to the extrusion or intrusion of a
cruciform.1921 A synthetic branched junction with two opposite
arms linked can relocate its branch point in response to positive
ethidium-induced supercoiling, representing the first experimental
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 351
step in developing DNA structural transitions that can achieve a
nanomechanical result.1922 The possible use of the B-Z transition
(e.g., from right-handed B-DNA to left-handed Z-DNA) in
nanomechanical devices is being explored.2409
In 1998, Winfree and colleagues in Seeman’s laboratory1970
described a simple, predictable, highly precise technique for
arranging DNA molecules into two-dimensional crystals. At the
same time, a paper by Heath and others1980 described a
defect-tolerant computer architecture called the Teramac, a massively
parallel experimental computer which apparently could operate
normally with at least half of its most critical components failed.
The authors claimed this architecture showed it would be “feasible
to chemically synthesize individual [molecular] electronic components
with less than a 100% yield, assemble them into systems with
appreciable uncertainty in their connectivity, and still create a
powerful and reliable data communications network.”
One can also imagine a network of interlocking enzymelike
conformational switches, possibly embedded in a semirigid two- or
three-dimensional scaffolding of DNA1904,1913-1916 or protein1905,1913
molecules. Enzymes may display multivalent feedback inhibition
(making a NAND gate; Section 10.2.3.1) or may have multiple
metal-ion binding sites influencing enzymatic action;1928 an enzyme
requiring two conformational changes to inhibit its action could
serve as a biomechanical NAND gate if tethered to other similar
enzymes in an appropriately structured protein array.1905
Single-device error rates will be high but might be reduced to
acceptable levels by employing short multiply-redundant pathways
for each digital computational operation, or a sufficiently parallel
architecture.1980 Site-directed mutagenesis optimization of antibodies
has shown that natural proteins can be made significantly stiffer and
more stable by the mutation of just a few amino acids. Systems of
reciprocating actomyosin molecular motors (e.g., as found in muscle
fibers; Section 6.3.4.2) might serve as interdigitating components
of a push-pull mechanical logic architecture resembling rod logic or
a three-dimensional loom. In early 1999, Viola Vogel (University of
Washington Center for Nanotechnology) and colleagues discovered,
via computer simulation, a tension-activated fully-reversible biomechanical switch comprised of a single strand of fibronectin
protein—like untying a shoelace, a slight mechanical tug unravels
a folded segment, switching off the protein’s biochemical activity.3249
Mechanical coupling of intracellular Ca++ ion release channels
allows coordinated voltage gating across the surface membrane of
the sarcoplasmic reticulum inside muscle cells.1964 R. Bradbury
[personal communication, 1999] suggests that site-directed
mutagenesis could produce a family of proteins that could be activated
by the release of various mono- (e.g., K+
), di- (e.g., Ca++), and
tri-valent (e.g., Al+++) ions. This would allow multivalued logic (e.g.,
K = 1, Ca = 2, Al = 4), or increased parallelism or bandwidth (e.g.,
Ca = !(K & K), Al = !(Ca & Ca), etc.); once a protein exists that can
be activated by a single ion, then varying its architecture to allow
substitution of an ion of different size or charge is a relatively straightforward engineering exercise. A biomechanical Turing machine
design has also been reported by Shapiro.3247
10.2.3.3 Organic and Bioelectronic Computers
Many organic materials may be useful in electronic computing.
Electrical conduction in synthetic organic molecules is well
known1761,1906-1909,3125-3128 and already exploited in liquid-crystal
displays of laptop computers.1925 Doped polyacetylene is a conducting
plastic with a carbon backbone; undoped, it is an insulator. There
are many other known families of conducting polymers such as
polyaniline, which includes nitrogen atoms in the backbone, and
polythiophene, which includes sulfur.1833 Three-dimensional
interconnect arrays of organic conducting polymers have been
fabricated;1839 conductivity is higher along a chain than between
chains, so sheets of oriented chains can produce relative conductivity
anisotropies as high as 100-1000.1927 An all-plastic transistor has
been built.1935 Organic transistors have been used as the active
semiconducting element in thin-film transistors fabricated with
organic-material thicknesses ranging from 5-150 nm,1842 and
organic microscale transistors and other organic devices may
exploit bulk-effect electron transport just like silicon-based semiconductor devices.1923 Conjugated polymer poly(1,6-heptadiester)
was employed to make an optical correlator with a peak processing
rate of 3 x 1016 operations/sec.1841 Spin-transition polymers could
serve as thermal sensors or memory devices with the theoretical ability
to store one bit in a ~4 nm cube (~2 x 107 bits/micron3 storage
density) with ~GHz addressing speeds at room temperature.1840
Other organic polymers possibly useful in logic circuits have been
investigated.2899
Natural biological materials may also be useful in electronic
computing,1777,1925,3129 particularly because of the ability of biological materials to self-assemble. Biomolecular electronics is a
subfield of molecular electronics that investigates the use of native
as well as modified biological molecules (chromophores, proteins,
etc.) in place of the organic molecules synthesized in the laboratory.1777
In theory, a three-dimensional DNA or protein scaffolding could
be self-assembled, with bacteriorhodopsin, ferritin and magnetite,
or related bioelectromagnetic molecules inserted into precise locations
within the structure to produce a crystal lattice bioelectronic or
biooptoelectronic nanocomputer. DNA already has been used as an
atomic scaffold upon which to build silver wires ~100 nm in
diameter1961 and has been decorated with fullerenes.3024
Self-assembly can generate membrane-based1931,1932 and
biotubule-based1926 devices, and site-directed mutagenesis is a
valuable tool for high-resolution protein device engineering.1933
Nucleotide sequence-specific electron transfer between
metallic electron donor and acceptor complexes covalently or
noncovalently intercalated into strands of B-DNA has been demonstrated.1934
Perhaps the best-known bioelectronic (and biochemical) computer
is the neuron cell and its congeries—the ganglia, nerve trunks, and
brains. In 1997, David Stenger (NRL) and James Hickman (SAIC)
were attempting to culture and link together neuronal cells to build
a bioelectronic cell-based sensor “computer” for performing complex
pattern-recognition tasks.1966,1967 In early 1999, W.L. Ditto at Georgia
Tech announced the creation of a biological computer comprised
entirely of leech neurons, that was capable of perfoming simple
sums.3245 We can certainly imagine large numbers of cultured neurons
arranged in artificial three-dimensional spatial patterns to produce
a synthetic bioneural computer, but such a computer would operate at
only ~KHz frequencies and would be very energy inefficient since
each neuron consumes ~1010 kT per discharge (Section 4.8.6.2)—
thus offering few advantages.
10.2.4 Ultimate Limits to Computation
A nanosystem designer quickly discovers that total nanorobot
power demand (Section 6.5) is often dominated by computational
heat dissipation, rather than by energy dissipation from chemical or
mechanical processes. Thus important design objectives are to:
1. minimize onboard computation,
352 Nanomedicine • Volume I
2. maximize algorithmic efficiency (e.g., super-Turing computers),1910,3176 and
3. minimize power dissipation per computation operation, an
objective which may be met using reversible computing.
It is also interesting to consider the maximum possible information
density in physical matter as a calibration for current and projected
achievements.
10.2.4.1 Reversible Computers
Computers may be thought of as engines for transforming free
energy into waste heat and mathematical work.296 Early pioneers of
computing theory1984,1985 believed that each step in a a computer’s
binary computation required a minimum energy expenditure of ~kT
ln(2) ~3 zJ/bit at T = 310 K. In 1961, R. Landauer1986 argued that
it was the erasure of information, not computation per se, that generates waste heat. It is now known that computers can in principle do
an arbitrarily large amount of reliable computation per kT of energy dissipated.296 Following Landauer’s insight, Fredkin and
Toffoli1987 suggested an idealized “ballistic computer” that could,
in theory, compute at finite speed with zero energy dissipation and
zero error. A more pragmatic family of models are the “Brownian
computers”296 in which thermal noise pushes system elements in a
random walk throughout the entire accessible portion of the
computer’s configuration space; in these models, energy dissipation
trends to zero only in the limit of zero speed. Both ballistic and
Brownian computers require that all computations are logically
reversible, with no irreversible bit erasures and no machine state
having more than one logical predecessor—that is, the output
uniquely specifies the input.10
One simple implementation of reversible computing is the
retractile cascade.10,296,1743 In a retractile cascade, all inputs and all
intermediate states leading to a result are retained during the course
of a computation. After the computation is complete, the final
result is copied to an output register, requiring the irreversible erasure
of only enough bits in the output register to hold a copy of the final
result, which need cost no more than kT ln(2) per erased bit. The
computation is then reversed, step by step, culminating with the
original inputs; the slower the reversible steps are performed, the
less energy they may dissipate (but the longer the computation takes).
Schematics for a retractile AND gate, adder, shifter, and programmable
logic array have been published,1743 and in 1998 a reversible processor
based on a modern RISC architecture was being designed.1994 A
conventional computer architecture, implemented without regard
to reversibility, may perform 0.1-1 bit erasures/gate-cycle; by comparison, a retractile computer might average <10-4 bit erasures/
gate-cycle.1743 During the reversible portion of the computation,
Drexler’s exemplar rod logic design (Section 10.2.1) employs a
retractile cascade that reduces room-temperature energy dissipation
from the “classical” minimum of ~0.7 kT down to ~0.003 kT per
gate-cycle. In the limit of slow motion, all identified energy dissipation
mechanisms in combinatorial rod logic systems approach zero.10
The Tour-Seminario electrostatic field switch might attain ~10-5
kT per gate-cycle at room temperature; low-temperature helical logic
(Section 10.2.2.3) could achieve ~10-7 kT per gate-cycle.
Feynman1996 notes that the minimum free energy required for a
reversible computation may be made independent of the complexity
or number of steps in the calculation, and may be as small as ~kT
per bit of the output answer.
J.S. Hall1743 suggests two principal design rules for efficient
nanocomputers:
1. erase as few bits as possible, and
2. eliminate entropy loss in operations that do not erase bits.
Many reviews of reversible computing have been published.296,713,1097,1743,1988,1989
10.2.4.2 Quantum Computers
Digital computers manipulate discrete units of information, with
data strings stored as binary digits, or bits. Any two-state physical
system (e.g., high or low voltages in semiconductor circuits) can
represent these bits. Similarly, a quantum computer would use
quantum states of atomic or molecular systems to store data. For
example, the states of a hydrogen atom could be assigned such that
a wavefunction corresponding to a state of hydrogen would represent a
bit of data. Shining laser light on the atoms would trigger processing
the data by inducing transitions between electronic states.
Quantum systems, however, exhibit a peculiar phenomenon
known as superposition, in which several discrete states can be
processed by a single physical system at once, crudely analogous to
the musical effect of a single note being made up of many different
harmonics.1259 Superposition gives quantum systems the potential
to be enormously more powerful than conventional computers. Since
more than one state can be supported, quantum bits, or qubits,
may store a mixture of many bits of data at the same time. A
superposition of N qubits can store 2N binary digits. An operation on
these mixtures is massively parallel, effectively performing many
calculations simultaneously. For example, photons interacting with
an atom in a superposition of states drive all the states in the
superposition, producing another superposition corresponding to
all solutions of the original states. The advantage over conventional
computers is not merely linear, but exponential: A conventional
processor operates sequentially on 64-bit numbers, but a quantum
computer with 64 qubits would simultaneously operate on the full
set of 264 (~1019) binary values. An N-qubit quantum computer
could model an N-body system in real time6
; in contrast, the number
of operations required by a conventional computer to perform such
a simulation increases exponentially with the number of bodies.
Since the early 1980s, theoretical interest in quantum computing
has developed rapidly.6,1996-2004,2013 Many groups have begun
designing quantum computational architectures and constructing
physical quantum gates and devices. In 1995, one group at NIST
made a controlled NOT gate of two qubits from a cooled beryllium
ion in a radio-frequency trap,2005 while a French group used single
photons trapped in quantum cavities to control cesium atom
states.2006 In 1999, experiments began on an analog quantum
computer using electrons floating on liquid helium.3276 Others work
with NMR techniques,2007,2008,2014 storing data not in electron states
but in nuclear spins, which are less susceptible to perturbations.2002
Resonance effects between proton and electron spins in hydrogen
atoms can make AND and NOT gates, hence NAND gates, from
which all Boolean computers can be made. It has been suggested
that by encoding the amplitudes of a couple of thousand electron
states in a superposition, large amounts of data could be written
onto a single atom (see Section 10.2.4.3). The discovery of certain
error-correcting procedures,2003 since verified experimentally,2141 was
another important breakthrough. Unlike conventional devices, it is not
possible to simply check that qubits are in the right states,
because the act of measuring destroys the coherence. But Shor2009 proved
that information can be reliably stored and read from a several qubit
system even if one of the bits is corrupted, and it has been shown that
error correction can be applied during the computation process itself.2010
This opens the door to many-qubit systems; by 1998, two groups had
already performed 4-bit sums, and one group had demonstrated a
2-qubit device.2329Quantum game theory has also been investigated.2867
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 353
10.2.4.3 Bekenstein-Bounded Computation
A fundamental upper limit on the number of possible quantum
states in a bounded region (e.g., the maximum number of bits that
can be coded in a bounded region)—is given by the Bekenstein
Bound1990 as:

I 2 E R
 c ln(2) (bits) Bek = π
h {Eqn. 10.10}
within a spherical region of radius R containing energy E = mc2
where m is the enclosed mass, c = 3 x 108 m/sec (speed of light), and
 = h / 2 π where h = 6.63 x 10-34 joule-sec (Planck’s constant).
Maximum processing speed I is then bounded by the minimum
time for a state transition, which cannot be less than the time
required for light to cross the region of radius R, or:

˙
IBek
E
 ln (2) = (bits/sec) π
h {Eqn. 10.11}
Thus in theory, a single carbon atom of mass m = 2 x 10-26 kg and
radius R ~ 0.15 nm could be impressed with up to IBek ~ 108 bits
and could process information up to IBek ~ 1026 bits/sec in an
optimally-designed quantum computer. For a 1 micron3 computer
of mass ~10-15 kg, IBek ~ 1022 bits maximum storage capacity and
IBek ~ 1037 bits/sec maximum processing capacity. These values are
not the least upper limits; Schiffer and Bekenstein1991 estimate that
the Bekenstein Bound probably overestimates I and I by at least a
factor of 100, but Likharev1992 and Margolus and Levitin2319 have
derived similar limits. In 1998, proposed reversible quantum computer
systems would perform significantly below the Bekenstein
Bound.1993,1994
10.2.5 Dedicated Computational Organs
Nanostructured artificial organs specializing in control,
information processing, or data storage could be permanently
embedded within the human body. Such organs could provide a
user-accessible computational facility, or help coordinate and control
(or even subsume) the activities of in vivo medical nanorobots or
other dedicated nano-organs, including energy (Section 6.4.4),
communications (Section 7.3.4), navigation (Section 8.3.6), or
chronometer (Section 10.1.4) systems. Computational organs could
also serve as embedded data repositories (library nodules), including
personal medical and experiential records,2958,2959 customized calendars and personal data banks, or as communications encryption
and security interfaces.
In 1998, microchips glued to honeybees3727 or implanted under
the skin of livestock and household pets contained owner/address
information that could be retrieved by passing a reading wand over
the animal (e.g., Pet Trac, manufactured by A.V.I.D. Identification
Systems; Norco, California). Read-only microchips with identification
numbers for individual cattle were encased in acid-resistant porcelain
and inserted into an animal’s stomach ten days after birth. These
chips could be read by a handheld computer or a stationary reader;
Shearwell Data, which sold the chips for $6 each, planned to adapt
them to communicate with global positioning satellites so that farmers
could remotely track herd movements.3037 Peter Cochrane2958 notes
that a colleague (Kevin Warwick) has had a computer chip embedded under his skin,3324 bearing such personal information as medical
records and bank account and passport numbers. There were also
unconfirmed rumors of a subdermally-implanted bio-powered (4
milliamp) 16 mm2 transmitter chip called Sky-Eye, sold by Gen-Etics
for $7,500 as kidnap deterrence for “the rich and famous,” that supposedly emitted a personal tracking signal detectable by satellite.3702
10.3 Pressure Storage and Ballasting
Storage of gases at high pressure is useful for nanorobots that
must perform physiological gas transport functions1400 (Chapters
22 and 26) or emergency reactive functions (Chapter 24), for
devices which employ gases in onboard energy systems (Chapter 6),
or for devices which require gaseous chemicals for onboard
materials processing (Chapter 19). Pressurized gases are useful in
buoyancy maintenance to facilitate device exfusion from the
human body (Section 10.3.6), and possibly in the deactivation of
toxic biochemicals or microbial pathogens (Table 10.3). Keeping a
eutactic environment10 inside nanodevices requires the ability to
draw and to maintain a vacuum (Section 10.3.5). This ability also
may assist in metamorphic bumper (Section 5.4) and buoyancy
control.
10.3.1 Fluid Storage Tank Scaling
The ability of a vessel to store fluids at high pressure is determined
by the rupture strength of the valve and pipe systems and by the
tensile strength of the tank walls. A symmetric structural shell
transmitting only normal stresses in orthogonal directions may
employ either a stressed skin or a ribbed design. The stressed skin is
more efficient because the same material carries stress in both
directions and there is integral resistance to secondary torsional
and bending loads.2023 For a stressed skin spherical pressure vessel
of radius R with wall material of density ρwall and working stress σw,
containing fluid at pressure differential pfluid, the required wall
thickness twall is given by:2023

t p R
2 ( g R) wall
fluid
w wall
= σ ρ − {Eqn. 10.12}
where g = 9.81 m/sec2 (acceleration of gravity). For all but the most
enormous macroscale tanks, the second term in the denominator is
negligible and so the maximum pressure differential that can be
restrained by a spherical microscale tank without bursting is:

p
2 t
R max sph
wall w = σ {Eqn. 10.13}
Thus a tank of radius R = 1 micron made of diamondoid walls
which are twall = 5 nm (~30 carbon atoms) thick with σw = 1010 N/
m2 (~0.2 times the failure strength of diamond; Table 9.3) can store
fluids up to a maximum pressure differential of pmaxsph = 1000 atm.
Empty tank mass is Mtank ~ 4 π ρwall twall R2 = (4 π ρwall / 2 σw)
pmaxsph R3
, for twall << R. A spherical fullerene nanotank with
defect-free single-carbon walls (twall ~ 0.34 nm thick), pressurized
to pmaxsph ~ 1000 atm differential, must have R  67 nm or it may
burst.
Similarly, for a cylinder or pipe of radius R:

p
t
R max cyl
wall w = σ {Eqn. 10.14}
Note that a hemispherical-capped cylindrical tank, pressurized
until it explodes, will usually split its sides before blowing off its
ends because pmaxsph = 2 pmax cyl. Wall stress for a cylindrical tube with
Young’s modulus E, inside radius R and wall thickness twall upon which
is imposed a pressure differential of pcyl is ~ pcyl R / twall,
362 giving a
354 Nanomedicine • Volume I
wall strain of S ~ pcyl R / twall E; hence a single-walled carbon nanotube
with R = 20 nm, twall ~ 0.2 nm, and E ~ 1012 N/m2 pressurized to pcyl
= 1000 atm stretches by S ~ 1%. (For comparison, aluminum soda pop
cans are pressurized to ~2 atm differential, beer cans ~1 atm.)3703
For a toroid tank of small meridional radius r and large circumferential (hoop direction) radius R, the burst pressure in the
meridional (pmax merid) and hoop (pmax hoop) directions are:2023

p
t
r max merid
wall w = σ {Eqn. 10.15}

p
2 t
r max hoop
wall w = σ {Eqn. 10.16}
Hence as pressure is raised, the toroidal tank fails first in the
meridional direction, much like the capped cylinder.
Spherical pressure vessels are the most efficient. The maximum
mass of gas that can be contained within a spherical tank at ideal
gas pressures (Section 10.3.2) is Mgas ~ (4 π NA mgas / 3 Rgas Tgas)
pmax R3
, where NA = 6.023 x 1023 molecules/mole (Avogadro’s
number), mgas is the mass per gas molecule, Rgas = 8.31 J/mole-K
(universal gas constant), and Tgas is gas temperature. Thus we
observe that the ratio of gas mass to structural mass (Mgas/Mtank) at
a given pressure is constant and independent of the size of the tank.
This ratio reaches a maximum value at maximum pressurization;
the maximum value is independent of both tank size and the
maximum pressure selected (within the ideal gas range). In particular,
Mgas/Mtank ~ 2 σw NA mgas / 3 Rgas Tgas ρwall ~ 21 for nitrogen gas
molecules (mgas = 4.65 x 10-26 kg/molecule) stored at temperature
Tgas = 310 K. That is, the tank can store up to ~21 times its weight
of gas.
Other important microtank design constraints include diffusion
leakage and vessel flammability (Section 10.3.4), vapor pressure of
tank materials at high temperatures (Section 10.3.5), thermal
cycling during filling and discharging operations (Section 5.3.3),
resistance to mechanical crushing, and susceptibility to acoustic
resonances (e.g., the natural frequency of an rsph ~ 1 micron hollow
diamondoid sphere is of order ~vsound / rsph ~ 20 GHz, fortunately
much higher than most nanomedically useful frequencies).
10.3.2 The Van der Waals Equation
The compressibility of gases is most simply described by the
well-known ideal gas law:

p V n gas gas gas gas = R T {Eqn. 10.17}
where pgas, Vgas and n are gas pressure, volume, and number of moles,
respectively. However, all real gases deviate to some extent from the
ideal gas law, even at STP. Most real gases obey the ideal gas law to
within a few percent at low densities—that is, at low pressures (e.g.,
 1 atm) and at temperatures well above their condensation points.
For real gases at high pressure, finite molecular volumes and intermolecular attractions cause significant deviation from the ideal gas
law. In 1873, J.D. van der Waals deduced an empirical equation of
state (subsequently derived from statistical mechanics using suitable
approximations1031) that reproduces the observed behavior of real
gases with moderate accuracy:

(p A n
V gas ) V B n n R T
2
gas
+ 2 ( ) gas gas gas − = {Eqn. 10.18}
where A is a measure of intermolecular attraction and B is a measure of
finite molecular volumes. The van der Waals gas “constants,” given
in Table 10.1 for various gases, are known to vary slightly with temperature. Nevertheless, while Eqn. 10.18 is only one of several
expressions commonly employed to represent real gas behavior, it is
the simplest to use and to interpret. The van der Waals equation
remains approximately valid even at temperatures and molar volumes
so low that the gas has become a liquid.1031 Note that the critical
temperature Tcrit, the highest temperature at which gas and liquid
may exist as separate phases at any pressure, is approximated by Tcrit
= 8 c1 A / 27 B Rgas, where c1 = 1.01 x 105 J/m3
-atm and Rgas = 8.31
J/mole-K; critical pressure pcrit = A / 27 B2
.
390 For example, in the
case of water, at temperatures and pressures above Tcrit = 647.3 K
and pcrit = 218.3 atm,763 the vapor and liquid phases become indistinguishable.
The boiling point of a pure liquid as a function of pressure may
be approximated by:2036

ln p
p
H
R
1
T
1
T
2
1
vap
gas 1 2


 

 = − 

 


∆ {Eqn. 10.19}
where T1 and T2 are the boiling points (in K) at pressures p1 and p2,
respectively, ∆Hvap is the molar heat of vaporization for the liquid (Table
10.8), and Rgas = 8.31 J/mole-K. (This formula assumes that ∆Hvap
is constant over the temperature range from T1 to T2.) Taking T1 =
373.16 K, ∆Hvap = 40,690 J/mole, and p1 = 1 atm for water, then at
p2 = 6.4 atm the boiling point has risen to T2 = 435 K. Boiling
point also is altered by the presence of solute (Section 10.5.3).
Table 10.2 shows the molecular number density achieved inside
gas storage vessels maintained at various pressures at Tgas = 310 K.
Note that there are significant (near-linear) gains in gas molecule
packing density up to 1000 atm, minor (non-linear) gains up to
10,000 atm, and no significant gain at >100,000 atm as density
approaches a limiting value for the liquid or solid state. Table 10.2
also shows that pressures calculated using the ideal gas law vary from
pressures calculated using the van der Waals equation by ~5% at
100 atm and ~50% at 1000 atm.*
One early experiment provided evidence of stably trapped (Section
10.3.4) room-temperature gases at ~1300 atm pressure inside carbon
Fig. 10.11. Phase diagram for water and ice (stable phases
only).2053,2054
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 355
nanotubes.1169 Single-walled carbon nanotubes have been experimentally charged with trapped hydrogen gas up to 5-10% by weight,2024
and with argon gas at ~600 atm.2034
10.3.3 Pressure-Altered Physical Properties
It is only possible here to briefly mention the many
pressure-mediated changes of physical properties that may be relevant
in nanomedical systems. Perhaps the most familiar is phase change,
as illustrated by Figure 10.11 in the case of water.2039,2040 Note that
as pressure rises from 1 atm to 2054 atm, the temperature at which
water remains liquid dips from 273.2 K to 251.2 K (the Ice I/III/
water triple point,2962), but then the liquidity threshold returns to
higher temperatures as pressure rises further and a different ice phase
forms; D2O shows similar behavior.2960 At a constant 310 K (37˚C),
Table 10.1. Van der Waals Equation Gas Constants763
A B
Gas Molecule Chemical Formula (m6
-atm/mole2
) (m3
/mole)
Acetic acid CH3COOH 1.759 x 10-5 1.068 x 10-4
Acetone (CH2)2CO 1.391 x 10-5 9.940 x 10-5
Acetylene C2H2 4.390 x 10-6 5.136 x 10-5
Ammonia NH3 4.170 x 10-6 3.707 x 10-5
Argon Ar 1.345 x 10-6 3.219 x 10-5
Benzene C6H6 1.800 x 10-5 1.154 x 10-4
n-Butane C4H10 1.447 x 10-5 1.226 x 10-4
Carbon dioxide CO2 3.592 x 10-6 4.267 x 10-5
Carbon monoxide CO 1.485 x 10-6 3.985 x 10-5
Chlorine Cl2 6.493 x 10-6 5.622 x 10-5
Chloroform CHCl3 1.517 x 10-5 1.022 x 10-4
Diethyl ether (C2H5)2O 1.738 x 10-5 1.344 x 10-4
Ethane C2H6 5.489 x 10-6 6.380 x 10-5
Ethanol C2H5OH 1.202 x 10-5 8.407 x 10-5
Ethylene C2H4 4.471 x 10-6 5.714 x 10-5
Helium He 3.412 x 10-8 2.370 x 10-5
n-Hexane C6H14 2.439 x 10-5 1.735 x 10-4
Hydrogen H2 2.444 x 10-7 2.661 x 10-5
Hydrogen chloride HCl 3.667 x 10-6 4.081 x 10-5
Methane CH4 2.253 x 10-6 4.278 x 10-5
Methanol CH3OH 9.523 x 10-6 6.702 x 10-5
Naphthalene C10H8 3.974 x 10-5 1.937 x 10-4
Neon Ne 2.107 x 10-7 1.709 x 10-5
Nitric oxide NO 1.340 x 10-6 2.789 x 10-5
Nitrogen N2 1.390 x 10-6 3.913 x 10-5
Nitrous oxide N20 3.782 x 10-6 4.415 x 10-5
n-Octane C8H18 3.732 x 10-5 2.368 x 10-4
Oxygen O2 1.360 x 10-6 3.183 x 10-5
Phosphorus P4 5.294 x 10-5 1.566 x 10-4
Propane C3H8 8.664 x 10-6 8.445 x 10-5
Water H2O 5.464 x 10-6 3.049 x 10-5
Table 10.2. Gas Molecules Packed into a Pressure Vessel: Number Density as a Function of Pressure at 310 K,
using the Van der Waals Equation
O2 Molecules CO2 Molecules N2 Molecules He Atoms Ideal Gas Law,
Applied Pressure per m3 per m3 per m3 per m3 No. per m3
(Solid) 268 x 1026 214 x 1026 221 x 1026 --- ---
(Liquid) 215 x 1026 151 x 1026 174 x 1026 184 x 1026 ---
≥100,000 atm 189 x 1026 141 x 1026 153 x 1026 --- 23,700 x 1026
10,000 atm 177 x 1026 134 x 1026 145 x 1026 --- 2370 x 1026
1000 atm 126 x 1026 111 x 1026 106 x 1026 123 x 1026 237 x 1026
100 atm 25.5 x 1026 68.9 x 1026 24.5 x 1026 21.7 x 1026 23.7 x 1026
10 atm 2.38 x 1026 2.47 x 1026 2.38 x 1026 2.34 x 1026 2.37 x 1026
1 atm 0.237 x 1026 0.238 x 1026 0.237 x 1026 0.237 x 1026 0.237 x 1026
0.1 atm 0.0237 x 1026 0.0237 x 1026 0.0237 x 1026 0.0237 x 1026 0.0237 x 1026
Molecular mass: 5.32 x 10-26 kg 7.31 x 10-26 kg 4.65 x 10-26 kg 6.64 x 10-27 kg ---
* For comparison, pressures of ~1000 atm occur naturally in the deepest part of the ocean (the Marianas Trench), ~10,000 atm at the crust-mantle interface (the Mohorovic
discontinuity), 3.64 million atm at the Earth’s core, and ~109
 atm at the center of the Sun.
356 Nanomedicine • Volume I
isothermal static compression of pure liquid water causes crystallization from the liquid to solid Ice VI near ~11,500 atm. Unlike water,
most materials contract upon freezing, thus freezing point is normally
raised by higher pressure. For example, the melting point of paraffin
wax is 319.8 K at 1 atm but rises to 323.1 K at 100 atm.1697
At 273 K, gaseous carbon dioxide compressed to 35 atm suddenly
liquefies; at 300 K, pressurized CO2 remains liquid up to ~4500
atm, whereupon it solidifies.2035 However, Tcrit = 304.2 K for CO2,
so if the gas is stored in pressure vessels at 310 K (human body
temperature) > Tcrit, the physical properties change continuously,
showing no sign that the gas has condensed to a liquid,
although over ~200 atm the fluid behaves like carbon dioxide liquid.2036
CO2 compressed to 400,000 atm at 1800 K forms a translucent
quartzlike extended covalent solid that is metastable down to ~room
temperature at pressures >10,000 atm.3181 Other gases of
nanomedical interest such as oxygen (Tcrit = 154.4 K), nitrogen (Tcrit
= 126.1 K), hydrogen (Tcrit = 33.3 K), and helium (Tcrit = 5.3 K)
show a similar continuous progression of gas/liquid properties at
310 K with rising pressure. Helium solidifies to ~1000 kg/m3
 crystals
at 115,000 atm at 297 K.2037 Room temperature isopropyl alcohol
solidifies into a glassy state at ~44,000 atm, while a 4:1 methanol/
ethanol mixture remains hydrostatic up to 104,000 atm.2051
Hydrogen solidifies at 57,000 atm at 298 K, making 600 kg/m3
crystals;568 solid deuterium at 300 K compacts from ~620 kg/m3 at
100,000 atm to ~1400 kg/m3
 at 1 million atm.2038
Vessel wall materials also are subject to pressure changes. Diamond
crystal plastically deforms at a pressure of only ~1 atm at ~1773 K,
but at ~1300 K, ductile flow in diamond requires pressures >60,000
atm.2041 At room temperature the diamond {111} surface compressed
in the {110} direction is indented by pressures 880,000 atm;
compression of the {001} surface requires 560,000-1 million atm
for indentation, depending upon the direction of the applied
load.1597 Colorless diamond takes on a light brown coloration
between 1.0-1.7 million atm, a probable crystallographic phase
transition.2043 The equilibrium phase diagram for the carbon system
suggests that graphite could begin to be converted to diamond at
room temperature as low as 20,000 atm, although pressures of
50,000-65,000 atm at 1600-2000 K are employed for commercial
diamond production in combination with Group VIII metal catalysts,537,2042 and experiments show that graphite transforms to a
transparent (but nondiamond) phase at ~180,000 atm at room
temperature.2856 Fullerenes are also susceptible to allotropic change
at high pressure—nonhydrostatic compression of C60 molecules
induces a transformation to diamond above ~150,000 atm,2044 and
bulk C60 converts into two different metastable structures (e.g.,
face-centered cubic at 600-700 K and rhombohedral at 800-1100
K) at 50,000 atm.2045 Computer simulations suggest that an “armchair” carbon nanotube can tolerate ~106 atm for ~10 years before
failing.2957 As for sapphire and ruby (primarily corundum or Al2O3),
no structural transformations were observed in an x-ray diffraction
study of ruby compressed to 1.75 million atm at room temperature,2046
a similar study found a polymorphic phase transformation at pressures
as low as 850,000 atm when the ruby was heated above ~1000 K.2047
Finally, while negative volume compressibility is thermodynamically
forbidden, lanthanum niobate crystals and several other materials
display negative linear or areal compressibilities—that is, they
expand in one or two directions (while maintaining constant volume)
when hydrostatic pressure is applied.1297
The solubility of gases in liquids strongly increases with pressure
(Section 9.2.6), but the effect of pressure on solubility of crystalline
or liquid substances in liquids is usually very small and may be
predicted by Le Chatelier’s principle since it depends on the relative
volumes of the solution and the component substances.2048 For
example, raising the pressure from 1 atm to 1000 atm only increases
the 298 K aqueous solubility of sodium chloride from 359 gm/liter
to 370 gm/liter.2036 Room temperature liquid carbon dioxide at ~200
atm pressure (~753 kg/m3 at 310 K) has been used for decades as a
nontoxic solvent in chemical processing, such as the process for
extraction of caffeine from coffee pioneered by General Foods; a
microemulsion of aqueous micelles in liquid carbon dioxide extends
solvation to proteins which are normally insoluble in pure CO2.
2049
There are many other effects of elevated pressures. For example,
the speed of sound generally increases with higher pressure (e.g., by
~0.25 (m/sec)/atm in water near 1 atm; Section 4.5.1). As another
example, very highly compressed materials may enter a metallic
(electrically conducting) state (e.g., room temperature cesium
iodide becomes metallic at ~1.15 million atm2052).
There are also significant effects of elevated pressures on biology.3218
The summary in Table 10.3 suggests that the largest biological cells
are harmed by pressures under 1000 atm; small cells and viruses
may be inactivated at a few thousand atm; antigens, toxins, enzymes,
and other proteins are deactivated or denatured near ~10,000 atm
of pressure.585 (See also Section 10.4.2.3.) Microbial death at >2000
atm is considered to be due to changes in the permeability of cell
membranes.3106 Protein denaturation occurs at higher pressures
because noncovalent bonds are destroyed or formed as system volume
declines.3107 Proteins, carbohydrates and nucleic acids, whose tertiary
structures are composed of noncovalent bonds, change their structures
at pressures between 2000-10,000 atm, leading to denaturation,
coagulation, or gelatinization; covalent bonds in pure substances
usually do not undergo changes at these pressures.3106 Irreversible
effects on biological materials are generally observed at pressures
>1000-2000 atm.3106 Most of the challenges presented by very high
pressures as described in this Section can be avoided by conservatively
restricting nanomedical storage vessels to a maximum operating
pressure of ~1000 atm.
10.3.4 Vessel Leakage and Flammability
Drexler10 estimates that valve, gasket or seal mechanisms with
opposing faces at an equilibrium separation of 0.3 nm should
experience a negligible fluid leakage rate at elevated pressures for all
atoms or molecules except helium. In the case of helium at 300 K,
the estimated leakage rate of ~10-15 atoms/nm-sec through a seal
opposing a ~10-5 atm head pressure (~1020 atoms/m3
) rises to ~10-7
atoms/nm-sec at a ~1000 atm head pressure (~1028 atoms/m3
)
10.
Thus at 1000 atm, the mean waiting time for a seal of length 100
nm to pass a single He atom is ~105 sec (~1 day), which is an
extremely slow leakage rate given that a 1 micron3 pressure vessel at
1000 atm contains ~1010 helium atoms (Table 10.2). Positive ions
such as Li+ and Be++ have smaller radii than helium atoms and thus
could in theory pass more easily than helium through a seal, but
these ions will rarely be found in large numbers outside a solvating
liquid environment.10
Gases might also leak out by diffusion through pressure vessel
walls. Hydrogen has the highest coefficient of diffusion of all the
gases (Table 3.3). H2 readily diffuses through porous substances
such as clay, rubber, and even quartz and silica at elevated temperatures. Gases may diffuse through conventional metals, which
have numerous defects, dislocations and grain boundaries, and
through silicate glasses, which have open irregular structures that
permit substantial diffusion of helium.10 Hydrogen also dissolves
in and diffuses through the metals of the nickel, palladium and
platinum groups. For example, Pd may dissolve ~900 volumes of
H2 at 293 K and 1 atm, and diffusion through a palladium thimble
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 357
Table 10.3. Biological and Biochemical Effects of High Pressure585,3106,3112,3401
Biological Material Pressure (atm) Results of Compression to Very High Pressures
Cell Division:
Eggs (Arbacia) 100-400 Progressive reversible solation of gelated cortical cytoplasm
Eggs (annelid, echinoderm, vertebrate) 100-500 Cleavage-inhibiting pressure, increases with temperature (5-30˚C)
Eggs, misc. marine 200-400 Reversible inhibition of cleavage
Eggs (Urechis) 300-400 Reversible solation of spindles and asters; chromosome movement stopped
Eggs (Arabacia) 400 Reversible regression of cleavage furrows and cortical plasmagel solation
Eggs (Ascaria) 800 Exceptionally resistant to pressure; division not inhibited
Cell Physiology:
Amoeba population growth 136-340 Severely depressed; reversible after >1 day at top pressure
Ciliary movement 200-400 Reversible increase in beat frequency with rise in pressure
Contraction of pigment cells (fish) 200-400 Contraction phase reversibly inhibited; totally inhibited at higher pressures
Protoplasmic streaming (Elodea) 200-400 Solation of cytoplasm; streaming slowed, stopped at 400 atm; reversible
Protoplasmic streaming (Pelomyxa) 200-400 Solation of plasmagel; streaming stopped
Amoeboid movement (A. proteus) 200-500 Reversible plasmagel solation; pseudopodia collapsed; movement stopped
Heart rate (cultured tissue, frog) 300 Retardation at lower temperatures; acceleration at higher temperatures
Cells/Tissues:
Erythrocytes 500-3000 Rounded
Carcinoma (Brown-Pearce) 1000 Resistant
Chick heart (embryonic tissue) 1000-1850 Reduction of subsequent growth in culture
Sarcoma transplants (rat) 1800 Inactivated
Carcinoma (Brown-Pearce) 1800 Transplantability destroyed
Erythrocytes 5000 Disintegrated
Bacteria/Fungi:
Staphylococci and colon bacteria 3000 Unaffected
Bacillus anthracis 3000 Partial loss of virulence; death of vegetative cells
Streptococci 3000 Killed or retarded in growth
E. coli 3800 Inactivated after 10-minute exposure
Yeast cells 4000-6000 Death, preceded by cytoplasmic flocculation or coagulation
Bacteria (various species) 5000 Vegetative cells killed
Bacterial spores 12,000 Killed
Viruses:
Rous sarcoma, Shope papilloma 1800 Tumors delayed
Staphylococci bacteriophage 2000 Inactivated
Yellow fever (monkey) 3000 Slightly attenuated
Herpes (rabbit) 3000 Inactivated
Tobacco necrosis 3000-5000 Inactivated
Rabies (rabbit) 4000 Attenuated
Papilloma Sarcoma filtrate 4000 No tumors
Avian pest (fowl plague) 4000 Inactivated, but retained antigenicity
Foot and mouth disease 4000 Inactivated
Vaccimia (rabbit) 4500 Inactivated
Rabies (rabbit) 5000 Inactivated
Bacteriophage (B. megatherium) 7000 Inactivated
Bacteriophage (B. subtilis, B. typhosa) 7000 Inactivated
Encephalomyelitis (rabbit) 7000 Inactivated
Tobacco mosaic virus 7500 Inactivated; coagulated
Antigens/Antibodies:
Tuberculin, Cobra venom 13,500 Not destroyed; lethality unchanged
Equine tetanus antitoxin 13,500 Gelated; partially inactivated
Diphtheria toxin 13,500 Partially destroyed
Tetanus toxin 13,500 Greatly attenuated or inactivated
Diphtheria toxin 17,600 Mostly destroyed
Enzymes:
Ribonucleode polymerase 6000 Reversible diminution in activity
Pepsin, Rennin 6000-7600 Inactivated or largely inactivated
Chymotrypsinogen, Trypsin 7600 Partially inactivated
Amylase, Lipase, Sucrase, Lactase 8000-15,000 Some completely, others partially inactivated
Proteins:
Gelatin 2000 Gelation accelerated
Gelatin gel 3000 Water squeezed out
Equine serum globulin 3000-13,000 Gelated
Soy protein 4000 Completely coagulated
Egg albumin 5000 Slight stiffening
Egg albumin 7000 Completely coagulated
Egg albumin 7500 Denatured and coagulated; SH groups exposed
Carboxyhemoglobin 9000 Coagulated
Insulin 10,000 Coagulated, but not physiologically inactivated
358 Nanomedicine • Volume I
is often used in the laboratory to purify hydrogen gas. H2 diffusion
through bulk metals has been widely studied.2056,2057
However, diffusion leakage through defect-free pressure vessel
walls comprised of diamond, graphene, or corundum should be
negligible. “It is difficult to see how a molecule can pass through
these materials without undergoing a reactive transformation.” 10
The energy required to move atomic hydrogen from free space into
a minimum-energy site in diamond is thermally prohibitive (800
zJ),2055 and the required energy is even higher for molecular hydrogen.
Room temperature gases at ~1300 atm1169 and argon gas at ~600
atm2034 have been stably trapped inside carbon nanotubes, and
confirmed by computer simulations,3212-3215and helium atoms at
energies up to ~5 eV (~800 zJ) cannot penetrate a graphene sheet.
Ruby (corundum) is commonly used in diamond anvil experiments
in which hydrogen is compressed to pressures >106 atm with no
apparent leakage.2043Thus it appears that essentially leakproof pressure
vessel walls can be constructed, although no computational studies
of diamond/sapphire interfaces had been performed by 1998 [D.W.
Brenner, personal communication, 1999]. Double-walled structures
with an intervening space containing either getter materials or a pumped
vacuum may be used, if necessary, for added safety.10
Microscopic pressure vessels comprised of diamond and filled
with compressed hydrogen or oxygen are potentially flammable,
even explosive. However, the chemical energy contained within a
volume scales as ~L3 while the dissipation of that energy during an
explosive event (e.g., pressure, heat, light) occurs across a surface
which scales as ~L2
, hence energy dissipation per unit area (and
thus the relative impact of an explosion on the local environment)
scales as ~L-1 which implies declining severity at smaller device sizes
(Chapter 17). For example, a liter of nitroglycerine produces a blast
intensity of ~108 J/m2
, while a spherical 1 micron3 of nitroglycerine
gives only ~103
 J/m2
 upon decomposition.
Heat from operating valves is small and is rapidly conducted
away in a diamondoid structure. Corundum employed at all structure/
oxidant interfaces virtually eliminates device combustibility. Even
for bulk diamond in contact with pure oxygen gas at 1000 atm, the
time required to etch a single layer of carbon atoms of thickness
~0.17 nm at 310 K may be crudely estimated from Eqn. 9.55 as
~1011 years; at 400 K, the atomic-layer etch time is still ~400 years.
Further discussion of possible nanodevice combustibility is deferred
to Chapter 17.
10.3.5 Vacuum Pumping and Storage
It will frequently be necessary to establish and maintain vacuum
conditions inside nanorobots. Vacuum-enclosing shells were briefly
considered in Section 9.5.3.3 and were found incapable of providing
sufficient buoyant lift in normal air due to buckling
instabilities. However, nanoscale pressure hulls capable of retaining
vacuum may be surprisingly thin-walled. In the simplest case, consider
a circular cylindrical diamondoid tube of inside radius rtube, wall
thickness htube, Young’s modulus E = 1.05 x 1012 N/m2 and Poisson’s
ratio cPoisson ~ 0.1.10 When the relative external pressure on the hull
is so large that the cylinder becomes neutrally unstable, a small
deformation into an elliptical cylinder is possible. The critical pressure
of buckling is given by:361

p
E h
4 r (1 c crit tube
3
tube
3
Poisson
2 = − )
{Eqn. 10.20}
Taking rtube = 500 nm and pcrit  1 atm for a vacuum vessel surrounded
by normal atmospheric pressure, a hull thickness of htube  3.7 nm
will not buckle. Such a hull has a mass ~60 times greater than the
mass of the displaced air.
How fast can the vacuum be established? Consider a cubical
vessel of volume Vbox = Lbox
3 = 1 micron3 containing gas at
molecular number density ngas, which is to be evacuated. Molecular
sorting rotors (Section 3.4.2) are embedded in the six walls, with
each rotor mechanism of area Arotor = 100 nm2 having at least one
binding site of area Areceptor = 0.1 nm2 always exposed to the box
interior. There are Nrotor = (6 Lbox2 / Arotor) = 60,000 sorting rotors
in the box walls. Gas molecules of thermal velocity vthermal (Eqn.
3.3) nearest the walls travel one mean free path λgas (Eqn. 9.23) and
impact a rotor mechanism. On average, after Arotor/Areceptor impacts
a binding site is hit; after nencounter = 10 independent hits, the molecule is finally captured by the receptor. Thus the time required
for a receptor to capture a gas molecule is tbind ~ nencounter λgas Arotor
/ vthermal Areceptor and the time required to evacuate the box is
approximately:

t ~
n V t
N
n n L A
6 v A vac
gas box bind
rotor
gas encounter gas box rotor
2
thermal receptor
= λ
{Eqn. 10.21}
At 1 atm and 310 K, ngas = 2.4 x 1025 molecules/m3 (Table 10.2)
and λgas = 200 nm; for pressures <0.2 atm, λgas ~ Lbox in the ballistic
regime. Taking λgas ~ 1 micron and vthermal = 490 m/sec for O2 at
310 K gives tbind ~ 20 microsec and the box is evacuated in tvac ~ 10
millisec. Note that for microscale vessels at atmospheric pressure,
tvac scales as ~Lbox2
.
Tank wall material sublimates into the vacuum, the solid establishing equilibrium with its vapor at a temperature-dependent vapor
pressure. However, this process produces negligible effluent at
moderate temperatures for likely nanorobot building materials. A
volumetric number density of one wall-material atom per micron3
of vacuum, representing a minimum detectable contamination in a
~1 micron3 box, equals a contaminant partial pressure of 4 x 10-8
atm. To reach this vapor pressure, carbon must be heated to 2480
K, aluminum to 1040 K (liquid), silver and corundum (e.g., ruby,
sapphire) to 800 K, and even zinc (a soft, low melting point, metal)
to 500 K.763 At 310 K, the vapor pressure of tank-wall carbon is
only ~10-116 atm, aluminum ~10-39 atm, corundum ~10-19 atm,
and zinc ~10-16 atm. Many organic materials evaporate or sublimate
more readily. At a vapor pressure of 0.001 atm, ethanol (C2H5OH)
vaporizes at or above 241.9 K, vs. 253 K for water-ice, 259.2 K for
octane (C8H18), 313.1 K for phenol (C6H5OH), but 426.8 K for
palmitic acid (CH3(CH2)14COOH), a typical fatty acid.763 A
water-ice surface exposed to hard vacuum sublimates at the rate of
6.5 nm/day at 134 K, 1.4 microns/day at 152 K, and 1.2 mm/day
at 183 K.2320
10.3.6 Buoyancy Control and Nanapheresis
Another design issue that may arise when operating in an aqueous
medium is buoyancy, which can readily be controlled by loading or
unloading ballast. At the extremes, a diamondoid sphere of radius 500
nm and wall thickness 5 nm may range in density from ~100 kg/m3 if
filled with vacuum to ~3000 kg/m3 if densely packed with diamondoid
machinery. Placed in blood plasma, these spheres would rise at ~0.5
micron/sec or fall at ~1 micron/sec, respectively, relative to the local
gravity field, according to Stokes’ Law for Sedimentation (Eqn. 3.10),
taking ρplasma = 1025 kg/m3 and plasma absolute viscosity as ηplasma =
1.1 x 10-3 kg/m-sec at 310 K. This range of speeds lies near the low end
of cytonatation velocities (0.1-10 microns/sec; Section 9.4.6) and well
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 359
below the maximum sanguinatation velocity (~10,000 microns/sec;
Section 9.4.2.6), which suggests that buoyancy control is unlikely to
play a significant role during routine in vivo nanorobot locomotion.
By comparison, the small difference in density between individual
red blood cells (1100 kg/m3
) and blood plasma at 310 K causes
them to settle out of suspension at a slightly faster 1-3 microns/sec
depending on hematocrit (the volumetric percentage of blood
occupied by red cells, typically ~46% in humans; Section 9.4.1.2)
and degree of RBC aggregation. Free-floating natural erythrocytes
appear unhandicapped by their faster settling rate, so active ballast
management for free-floating artificial nanorobots is probably
unnecessary in normal operations.
However, once a therapeutic purpose is completed it may be
desirable to extract artificial devices from circulation. Active ballast
control may be extremely useful during nanorobot exfusion from
the blood, particularly in the case of simpler devices which are
incapable of removing themselves from the body (Chapter 16).
Blood to be cleared may be passed from the patient to a specialized
centrifugation apparatus analogous to an apheresis circuit such as a
cytapheresis or plasmapheresis system. In nanapheresis, acoustic
transmitters command passing nanorobots to establish neutral
buoyancy. No other solid blood component can maintain exact
neutral buoyancy, hence those other components precipitate outward
during the gentle centrifugation and are drawn off and added back
to filtered plasma on the other side of the apparatus. Meanwhile,
after a period of centrifugation, the plasma, containing mostly
suspended nanorobots but few other solids, is drawn off through a
simple filter, removing the devices as residue. Plasma filtrate is
then recombined with centrifuged solid components and returned
undamaged to the patient’s body.
10.4 Cytocide and Virucide
The objective of nanomedical treatment is often cell repair or
replacement (Chapter 21). However, it will frequently be necessary
for medical nanorobots to destroy foreign viruses and pathogenic
bacteria, protozoa, or metazoan parasites. It may also become necessary
to eliminate native human tissue cells that have grown too
numerous in a local region, cells that have adopted or developed
major pathological, teratological or other undesirable patterns, or
which have been too severely traumatized to permit efficient repair.
There are at least two classes of nanomedical cytocidal
instrumentalities that may be employed to rid the human body of
unwanted cells. The first may be termed the biochemical approach
(Section 10.4.1), including methods which may take up to hours or
days to proceed to completion with acceptable reliability. Biochemical
methods can require relatively modest technological sophistication
to implement—an important consideration in the early years of
nanomedical device development. The second method may be
termed the mechanical approach (Section 10.4.2), which may
require only seconds or minutes to proceed to completion with very
high reliability, but which involves more sophisticated
nanomechanisms that might only be available in a mature
nanomedical technology environment.
10.4.1 Biochemical Cytocide and Virucide
Biochemical cytocide involves the killing of pathogenic cells
using biochemical, cytochemical, or other means which cause the
cell to die a “natural,” though perhaps highly accelerated, death. Any
agent or set of conditions that stresses the metabolism or normal
response mechanisms of a cell may trigger the process of apoptosis,
or programmed cell death, but the level of stress is crucial.2060
At high stress levels, including sharp pH changes or high toxin
levels (Section 10.4.1.4), or high agitation rates,2061 cells may die
instantly by necrosis,2291,2292 largely because they have no time to
respond to the stimulus. In necrotic cytocide, neighboring cells are
showered with cellular debris as the necrotic cell swells and lyses, an
event likely to cause wider injury and a process to be avoided in
nanomedical situations wherever possible.
At intermediate levels of cell stress, the cell is injured but not
killed, and so has time to activate its own suicide program.2060 The
contents of the dying cell are retained within sealed vesicles until
removed through phagocytosis, thus the cell dies in a controlled
and tissue-friendly way.
At low levels of environmental stress, cells can, for example, switch
on the production of heat shock proteins which helps them to survive
until the stress is removed,2060 largely by accelerating the refolding
of proteins which have been damaged by heat and some other
insults. Similarly, UV radiation activates a DNA damage response,
cell starvation activates the proteasome protein-recycling response,
and glucocorticoids might activate responses to eliminate all
non-essential functions.
Of course, once a certain stress threshold is passed and survival is
deemed impossible, death by apoptosis ensues. Nanomedical
bio-cytocidal instrumentalities should seek to dispose of cells by
apoptotic methods (Section 10.4.1.1), or by functionally equivalent
techniques such as phagocytic flagging (Section 10.4.1.2) or cell
division arrest (Section 10.4.1.3).
10.4.1.1 Apoptosis
It is believed that all nucleated (eukaryotic) cells of all multicellular life on Earth incorporate an evolutionarily conserved
self-destruct mechanism called programmed cell death, cell suicide,
or simply apoptosis. Scattered reports on cell death have appeared
in the literature (and were initially disbelieved) for more than a
century, but advances in cytochemistry in the 1980s and early 1990s
stimulated an explosion of interest in apoptosis, with ~2500 papers
published during 1989-19942062 and ~20,000 publications during
1994-1998.2065
Exactly what is apoptosis? Programmed cell death is the outcome of
a programmed intracellular cascade of genetically determined steps.
During apoptosis, the eukaryotic cell disassembles its DNA and
breaks up its contents into membrane-wrapped packets which can
then be cleared away without causing inflammation. Animals use
apoptosis to eliminate extraneous, virus-infected, or otherwise
dangerous cells.2075 Apoptosis plays a central role both in development
and in homeostasis of metazoans. Cells die by apoptosis in the
developing embryo during morphogenesis or synaptogenesis, and
in the adult animal during tissue turnover in the skin or gut or at
the end of an immune response. Tight coupling of cell death and
cell multiplication ensures in some tissues a constant, controlled
flux of fresh cells which are crucial to the preservation and optimal
functioning of the adult organism.2065 Such tissues include those
which are environmentally exposed, inside or outside, primarily
epithelial tissue and severely insulted liver tissue, plus cells involved
in reproductive function.
Apoptosis requires specialized machinery. The central component
of this machinery is an irreversible proteolytic system involving a
family of protein-chopping enzymes now called “caspases” from
“cysteine-containing aspartate-specific proteases” (aka ICE or
Interleukin-1β-Converting Enzyme). Caspases are expressed as
30-50 kD proenzymes with an NH2-terminal domain, a large ~20
kD subunit, and a small ~10 kD subunit.2068 These enzymes
360 Nanomedicine • Volume I
participate in a cascade that is triggered in response to proapoptotic
signals and culminates in cleavage of a set of proteins, ultimately
resulting in an orderly disassembly of the cell.2068
Such complex proteolytic systems involve a combination of
regulatory proteases, cofactors, feedbacks, and thresholds that
converge to control the activity of an effector protease, which in
turn carries out the function of the whole process.2071 These systems
keep the effector protease inactive but are able to rapidly activate
large amounts of it in response to minute quantities of an appropriate
inducer.2068 Survival signals from the cell’s environment and internal
cellular integrity sensors normally hold a cell’s apoptotic machinery
in check.
Four kinds of events can trigger a suicidal cascade in a eukaryote.2069
First, if a cell loses its normal contact with its surroundings or sustains
irreparable internal damage, then that cell initiates apoptosis. Second,
a cell that simultaneously receives conflicting signals driving or
attenuating its division cycle also undertakes apoptosis.2074 Third,
the immune system can actively direct individual cells to self-destruct,
an event called “instructive” apoptosis.2076-2078 Fourth, perhaps a
majority of all apoptosis occurs during gestation and development,
probably in response to external signal molecules or to a lack of
sufficient levels of molecular signal gradients involved in biostructural
development regulation.
Death receptors2069—cell surface receptors that transmit
apoptosis signals initiated by specific death ligands—play a central
role in instructive apoptosis. Death receptors can activate death
caspases within seconds of ligand binding, causing the apoptotic
demise of the cell within hours.2069 Death receptors belong to the
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor gene superfamily. (TNF is
produced mainly by activated macrophages and T cells in response
to an infection.2079) The death receptors contain a homologous
cytoplasmic sequence termed the “death domain.”2080,2081 Death
domains enable death receptors to engage the cell’s apoptotic
machinery, and mediate functions that are distinct from or even
counteract apoptosis.2069 In 1998, the best characterized death
receptors were CD95 (aka Fas2066 or Apo1) and CD120a (aka
TNFR1, Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor 1, or p55), but others
were known including avian CAR1, Death Receptor 3 (DR3; aka
Apo3, WSL-1, TRAMP, LARD), DR4, and DR5 (aka Apo2,
TRAIL-R2, TRICK-2, KILLER).2069
When a caspase cascade is triggered, the first task is to inactivate
proteins that protect living cells from apoptosis.2068This accomplished,
caspases next begin the direct disassembly of cell structure. One
example is the destruction of the nuclear lamina (Section 8.5.4.3),
the rigid structure underlying the nuclear membrane that is involved
in chromatin organization. Lamina is formed by head-to-tail polymers
of intermediate filament proteins called lamins (Section 8.5.3.11).
During apoptosis, lamins are cleaved at a single site by caspases,
causing the lamina to collapse, contributing to chromatin condensation.2082,2083
Caspases also reorganize cell structures indirectly by cleaving
several proteins involved in cytoskeletal regulation, including
gelsolin,2084 focal adhesion kinase (FAK),2085 and p21-activated
kinase 2 (PAK2).2086 Cleavage of these proteins results in deregulation
of their activity.2068 Dissociation of regulatory and effector domains
is another hallmark of caspase function. For example, they inactivate
or deregulate proteins involved in DNA repair (such as DNA-PKcs),
mRNA splicing (such as U1-70K), and DNA replication (such as
replication factor C).2087,2088
In 1998, 13 mammalian caspases—named caspase-1 to
caspase-13—were known.2067,2068Caspases cut their substrate proteins
at tetrapeptide sites with high specificity and with characteristic
motifs.2089 For example, caspase-3 recognizes DEVD sequences and,
during apoptosis, cleaves and inactivates several significant cellular
proteins in the cytosol, nucleus and cytoskeleton.2090-2092 Caspases
participate in apoptosis “in a manner reminiscent of a well-planned
and executed military operation;”2068 they:
1. cut off contacts with surrounding cells, so the cell balls up;
2. import calcium,2075 strongly complexing phosphates;
3. shut down DNA replication and repair, interrupt splicing,
disrupt the nuclear structure and condense the chromatin;
4. induce the loss of microvilli;2093
5. destroy cellular DNA by mobilizing apoptotic-unique
nucleases2091,2092 to cleave the double helix at regular intervals
in an orderly fashion, first into large fragments of 300-750
kilobases, followed by fragments of ~50 kilobases, then finally
oligonucleosomal length DNA fragments of ~200 base
pairs2062-2064 (giving a characteristic pattern by gel electrophoresis
called “DNA laddering”2094);
6. reorganize the cytoskeleton;
7. induce the cell to display signals in the outer membrane that mark
the cell for phagocytosis by neighboring cells or macrophages;2095
8. induce downstream blocking of mitochondrial respiratory chain
components, resulting in mitochondrial malfunction (via
transcriptional induction of redox related genes, the formation of
reactive oxygen species, and finally the oxidative degradation of
mitochondrial components2072,2073 including dissipation of
mitochondrial inner transmembrane potential and the release
of cytochrome c through the outer mitochondrial membrane2162),
with lysosomal involvement;2293
9. initiate membrane blebbing (surface blisters) and cell shrinkage;
and finally
10. disassemble the cell into multiple membrane-enclosed vesicles
called apoptotic bodies without destroying organelle membranes.
In vivo, this process culminates with the engulfment and
phagocytization of apoptotic bodies by other cells, preventing
inflammation and other complications that would result from a
release of intracellular contents. These changes occur in a predictable, reproducible sequence and can be completed within 30-60
minutes.2068
Many different ways of activating the apoptotic process are known
or suspected.2096 Simple detachment of tissue cells from all contacts
with the ECM1553 or manipulation of cell shape718 have been shown
to induce apoptosis experimentally. Apoptosis can also be indirectly
initiated by a variety of cellular insults that can damage DNA,
including ultraviolet- and x-irradiation, hypoxia, and chemotherapeutic neoplastic drugs (e.g., alkylating agents such as nitrogen
mustard derivatives, antimetabolites and plant alkaloids) which
inflict cell damage that is then translated via the Bcl-2 protein
family2097 through several poorly understood steps into activation
of caspase-9.2068 Proteins that sense DNA damage and help trigger
apoptosis also affect the cell cycle—stopping cell division so the
damage can be repaired or making the decision (with the activation
of tumor suppressor p53) that the damage has gone too far and the
cell must die.2074 B and T lymphocytes undergo apoptosis in
response to anti-IgM antibodies and dexamethasone (a glucocorticoid),
respectively.2098 The cell death program can also be activated by
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 361
inhibition of proteasome function,2099 or by infection with a wide
variety of viruses.2118
Caspases can be directly activated by two distinct intracellular
mechanisms that interact with the death receptor complexes. First,
because all caspases have similar cleavage specificity, the simplest
way to activate a procaspase is to expose it to a previously activated
caspase molecule. This caspase cascade is used extensively by cells
for the activation of the downstream effector caspases: caspase-3,
caspase-6, and caspase-7.2068
A second method for activating caspases is the use of apoptotic
chaperones, which herd together inactive proenzymes to increase
their local concentration and ease them into conformations that
promote their activation. This “induced proximity” was first
observed in caspase-8 (aka FLICE, MACH), an initiator caspase
that acts downstream of the CD95 death receptor.2069 Upon trimeric
ligand binding, CD95 receptor molecules are aggregated into a
membrane-bound complex. This signaling complex recruits, via the
receptor-bound adaptor protein FADD (Fas-Associated protein with
Death Domain; aka Mort-12100), several procaspase-8 molecules,
resulting in a high local concentration of procaspase-8. Under these
conditions, the low protease activity inherent to procaspases is
sufficient to drive intermolecular proteolytic activation of the
receptor-associated procaspase-8 molecules.2068 Proximity-induced
activation may also be used to activate caspase-9.2101 Procaspase-9
activation involves a complex with the cofactor Apaf-1 through the
CARD (Caspase Recruitment Domain), but activation of caspase-9
also requires cytochrome c (released into the cytosol by mitochondria2073) and deoxyadenosine triphosphate, indicating that
caspase activation may require multiple cofactors.
Death receptors can be expressed on both normal and cancerous
cells in the human body, so the challenge for conventional drug-based
therapy is to find some way to activate death receptors selectively
on cancer cells only.2068,2069 For medical nanorobots, such selectivity
should be simple and routine using multiple chemosensors (Section
4.2), a benefit that is characteristic of most nanorobot-based
therapeutics. If caspase cascade amplification is sufficient to permit
single-site activation of the cascade, then in theory an extracellular
nanorobot intending cytocide could press onto the outer surface of
a target cell an appropriate ligand display tool. This tool might contain
suitably exposed trimeric CD95L (aka FasL2066) ligand (binds to
the extracellular domains of three CD95 death receptors), TNF or
lymphotoxin α (binds to CD120a), Apo3L ligand aka TWEAK
(binds to DR3), or Apo2L ligand aka TRAIL (binds to DR4 and
DR5).2069,2070The binding event would then activate a single death
receptor complex, potentially triggering the entire irreversible cytocidal cascade. If necessary, multiple display tools could be employed.
This technique avoids the storage requirement for bulky consumables
onboard the medical nanorobot.
As another approach, molecular sorting rotors could be used to
selectively extract from the cytoplasm specific crucial molecular species
of IAPs (Inhibitors of Apoptosis2102) that can hold the apoptotic
process in check. Examples include survivin, commonly found in
human cancer cells 2058, the transcription factor NF-κB 2142, and
Akt, which delivers a survival signal that inhibits the apoptosis
induced by growth factor withdrawal in neurons, fibroblasts, and
lymphoid cells 2103. Conversely, decoy receptors (DcRs) that compete
with DR4 and DR5 for binding to Apo2L2104-2106 could be saturated
with intrinsically harmless but precisely engineered intracellular
“chaff” ligands. With IAPs removed or DcRs blockaded, apoptosis
may be free to proceed.
Multicellular plants and animals,2074,2075 human fibroblasts,2107
and even slime molds show various forms of apoptotic cell death.
Other processes of programmed cell death that may be distinct from
either apoptosis or necrosis have been reported in lung fibroblasts,2108
the caspase-free yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
2097 and other
cells.2109-2112 In 1998, apoptosis had not yet been reported in
any bacterial species, nor was it expected because conventional
evolutionary logic does not favor the emergence of cell suicide in the
case of obligate single-celled organisms.2073,2074 Autolysis has been
reported in bacteria in specialized circumstances,2113-2115,3704 including addiction modules3318-3320 and phage exclusion,3320-3322 though
these cases, while sometimes termed “programmed cell
death,”2113,3705-3709 all involve a (messy) necrotic cytocidal outcome
or self-damage short of cell death, rather than a (clean) apoptotic
cytocidal outcome. Apoptosis also is not found in viruses.
It is theoretically possible that an artificial plasmid could be
designed that embodies an engineered self-contained apoptotic system
capable of unleashing a non-necrotic cell death process inside a
prokaryote. A single such proapoptotic artificial plasmid (similar to
artificial chromosomes,2432 already in use by 1998) could then be
injected into the target bacterium, giving the desired clean cytocidal
outcome. R. Bradbury suggests the following useful components:
1. a restriction enzyme to fragment the bacterial DNA, that is
effective against that specific bacteria;
2. DNase to digest the DNA entirely, if not already present;
3. RNase to digest the RNA entirely; if not already present;
4. one or more proteases such as trypsin, to digest internal proteins;
and
5. one or more lipases to digest any lipids.
A lambda-phage container holding an engineered vector with only
the first two capabilities could still effectively “neuter” the bacterium.
Such a biorobot could be relatively harmless to eukaryotic cells,
assuming its enzymes lacked nuclear localization targeting sequences;
cleanup could be effectively handled by the immune system.
Bradbury also suggests another approach—using a DNA replication
blocker such as antisense DNA polymerase, in combination with a
mitotic promoter, to induce the cell to attempt to divide forever
while lacking any DNA in the progeny. Essential biomolecules would
eventually be diluted to such a low level that growth would radically
slow and perhaps even death would result. This second approach
might yield a faster decline in bacterial activity than simple neutering,
due to the diversion of bacterial resources in an attempt to regain
intracellular molecular balances. In either approach (as with
mechanical approaches; Section 10.4.2), it is necessary to avoid
fragmenting the bacterium in a way which allows release of
superantigen molecules such as LPS which could cause an immune
system overreaction, leading to toxic shock.
10.4.1.2 Phagocytic Flagging
Target cells may be flagged with biochemical substances capable
of triggering a reaction by the body’s natural defensive or scavenging
systems. For example, novel recognition molecules are expressed on
the surface of apoptotic cells. In the case of T lymphocytes, one
such molecule is phosphatidylserine, a lipid that is normally restricted
to the inner side of the plasma membrane (Section 8.5.3.2) but,
after the induction of apoptosis, appears on the outside.2117 Cells
bearing this novel surface molecule are then capable of being
recognized and removed by phagocytic cells. Seeding the outer wall
of a target cell with phosphatidylserine or other molecules with similar
action could activate phagocytic behavior by macrophages which
362 Nanomedicine • Volume I
had mistakenly identified the target cell as apoptotic. Loading the
target cell membrane surface with B7 costimulator molecules permits
T-cell recognition, allowing an immunologic response1556 via what
has been termed the immunological synapse.2930,2931,3453 This tagging
operation should work well against cells which have an apoptotic
response which can be triggered by cytotoxic T cells—such as
human cancer cells and cysts.
Aside from false apoptosis, removal or destruction of cell-surface
MHC class I receptors might convince the immune system that the
target cell was not native (e.g., “self”), making the target susceptible
to attack by natural killer NK lymphocytes.2130 (Macrophages should
be able to engulf a eukaryotic cell, as they are large enough to
absorb protozoa.531) Alternatively, the target cell’s surface would be
salted with a non-self antigen-containing MHC Class I molecule,
or with self MHC Class I molecules with foreign peptide attached
(particularly one for which the patient has already been vaccinated),
with the expectation that the cell would mistakenly be identified as
foreign, and thus be phagocytosed. Other methods of engineering
chemical reactivity by cell surface remodeling2127 are readily envisioned,
such as flagging with lymphokines or oligohistidine-tagged fusion
proteins.2274 But the best approach may be to seed the target cell
with antigens for which the patient already has a high titer of
circulating antibodies, which then will bind to the antigens and
attract the immune system. Antibodies occur in higher concentrations
than B/T cells and therefore would presumably trigger a faster
response. As a general rule, cells with bad MHC molecules are targeted
for apoptosis, while cells with antibodies attached are targeted for
phagocytosis.
10.4.1.3 Cell Division Arrest
In some circumstances it may be useful to eliminate a target
cell’s ability to replicate via cell division, thus rendering it incapable
of further growth. For example, many prokaryotic microorganisms
respond to starvation by entering growth-free stationary
phases3710-3712 or by forming dormant spores;2116 nanorobot manipulation of cellular biochemical states possibly could induce stasis in
bacteria, though spore formation should be avoided. The Bcl-2 protein
family can modulate eukaryotic cell cycle progression; under suboptimal growth conditions, Bcl-2 promotes exit into quiescence and
retards reentry into cycle.2097 A gene fragment on human chromosome 4, called mortality factor 4 (morf4), when added to cancerous
(eukaryotic) cells in vitro converts proliferating cells into senescent
cells that have stopped dividing.2128 Ceramide, the breakdown
product of sphingomyelins, can drive a eukaryotic cell either to
cycle arrest, or to apoptosis, depending upon other conditions within
the cell,2062 and p16 and p27 are known eukaryotic cell cycle
inhibitors.2059 Cytochalasins, which are derived from molds, interfere
with the division of cytoplasm, inhibit cell movement, and can cause
extrusion of the interphase nucleus.3718
Eukaryotic mitosis has four distinct stages (prophase, metaphase,
anaphase, telophase) and interphase (between divisions), each
associated with distinct biochemical and cytoarchitectural states.
Thus it is not surprising that specific biochemical agents have been
found that are capable of selectively halting, accelerating, or altering
mitosis at any of the many stages; a few examples are in Table 10.4.
Cell cycle control is discussed further in Chapter 12.
Many chemotherapeutic agents function by eliminating the cell’s
ability to undergo mitosis. For example, plicamycin (mithramycin)
is believed to form a complex with DNA which inhibits
DNA-dependent or DNA-directed cellular RNA and enzymatic
RNA synthesis—48-hour lethal dose in human HeLa cancer cells is
~1 part/million by weight or ~105 molecules/cell.2119 Eukaryotic
cell cycling may be interrupted by inhibitors of RNA polymerases
I, II, and III (which produce RNAs specific to different functions
in the cell), or by inhibitors of uracil synthesis or other steps in
general RNA base production which would interfere with RNA
synthesis overall. Vincristine applied at similar dosage (e.g., ~10-18
kg/cell) inhibits microtubule formation in the mitotic spindle,
resulting in an arrest of dividing cells at the metaphase stage.2119
Large doses lead to necrotic cytocide; a smaller dose may trigger
apoptosis.
A theoretical enzyme capable of selectively lysing DNA telomeres
in the nucleus would prevent cell replication, but would probably
trigger apoptosis due to massive chromatin damage because
TTAGGG sequences are scattered throughout the chromosome.383
Telomere length affects eukaryotic cell division only indirectly,
either because short telomeres activate a DNA damage response that
blocks cell division or because genes near the ends of chromosomes
which are essential for cell division may be lost or misregulated.
Telomerolytic enzymes would be useless against common bacteria
(e.g., E. coli) and viruses (e.g., SV40) which have circular DNA
chromosomes, or viruses such as the adenoviruses that cause bronchitis and pneumonia which have linear DNA locked with a terminal
protein—but no telomeres in either case.383 Alternatively, R.
Bradbury suggests the introduction of DNA (or RNA) for antisense
sequences, for genes essential for cell cycle progression or for proteases
which cut or digest these same proteins, as for instance an antisense
gene for cyclin or one of the many cdc genes—if phosphorylation
or dephosphorylation of the cyclins or cdc genes is occurring, the
introduction of a phosphatase or kinase could easily block the
entire cell division process.
10.4.1.4 Chemical Poisoning
There are a great many (often inefficient) ways to poison a cell
or virion simply by releasing chemical agents near, on, or within it,
but if done incautiously this approach may lead to necrotic, rather
than apoptotic, cell death. Here are a few examples of some
well-known classes of biocidal agents, many of which may be
inappropriate for use by in vivo medical nanorobots:
1. Phagosomal Biochemicals — Both types of phagocytic cells (e.g.,
neutrophils and macrophages) contain specialized organelles that
fuse with newly formed phagocytic vesicles (phagosomes),
exposing phagocytosed microorganisms to a barrage of
enzymatically produced, highly reactive molecules of superoxide
(O2
-
) and hypochlorite (HOCl, the active ingredient in bleach),
called the “oxidative burst” that punctures cell walls, and to a concentrated mixture of lysosomal hydrolases.531 Human neutrophils
also use antimicrobial peptides such as the serprocidins (e.g., proteinase 3, azurocidin, and cathepsin G, a metabolic inhibitor) against
fungi and bacteria.2132
2. Cytolytic Enzymes — Lysozymes, present in tears, nasal mucus
and sputum, destroy the cell walls of many airborne Gram-positive
bacteria by catalyzing the hydrolysis of β-1,4 linkages between N-acetyl
muramic acid and N-acetyl glucosamine (peptidoglycan degradation)
in bacterial cell walls996—causing the bacteria to burst open, spilling
their contents. Lysozyme, zymolase, glucalase and lyticase are frequently
used with bacteria and yeast cells to dissolve coats, capsules, or capsids.
Granulysin released by cytolytic T lymphocytes directly kills
intracellular Mycobacterium tuberculosis by altering the membrane
integrity of the bacillus.2165
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 363
3. Organelle Poisons — Certain drugs and other substances, if
injected into the cytoplasm, may interfere with the workings of specific
organelles or cell subsystems. For example, the fungal metabolite
drug brefeldin A disrupts the Golgi, causing it to collapse back into
the ER.2347,3441,3442 Colchicine,939 vinblastine and vincristine936
bind to tubulin, causing microtubules to disassemble, griseofulvin
(an antifungal agent) prevents microtubule assembly,996 and taxol
inhibits microtubule depolymerization, while cytochalasin B inhibits
the polymerization of cytoskeletal actin microfilaments.939
Adociasulfate-2 is a kinesin motor inhibitor.2390 High concentrations
of vitamin A weaken the lysosomal membrane. Proteasome inhibitors
such as vinyl sulphone2911 are usually lethal for the eukaryotic cell.
Oligomycin inhibits the F0F1-adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase)
proton pump of the mitochondrial inner membrane, and cyanide
poisons mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.2073 Nitric oxide
(conc. ~60 nanomolar) inhibits mitochondrial respiration,2918,2919
specifically by inhibiting cytochrome oxidase by outcompeting oxygen
at the oxygen binding site;2920 NO also prevents viral replication by
inactivating a crucial protease.2969 Antipsychotic drugs such as
chlorpromazine, thioridazine, and fluphenazine are potent peroxisome
inhibitors.3067The nucleus of an oocyte is ejected from a cell treated
with etoposide and cycloheximide (chemical enucleation),3719,3720
microtubule poisons such as colchicine, colcemid and vinblastine
cause extrusion of nuclei,3721 and EDDF is involved in erythroid
Table 10.4. Organic Compounds Affecting Eukaryotic Cell Division at Specific Phases of Mitosis585,760
Organic Substance Cell/Tissue Specific Mitotic Cycle Effect
Prophase:
Aureomycin Onion root Membrane dissolution delayed
Glutathione Amoeba proteus Prophase accelerated
Nitrophenols Sea urchin egg Prophase blocked
Purines Arbacia egg Reversion to interphase
Trypan blue Rabbit fibroblast Spindle formation slowed
Urethan Rabbit fibroblast Prophase accelerated
Metaphase:
Alcohol, DDT Onion root Nucleolus neoformation
Benzene Mammal marrow Mitotic poison—blocking agent
Colchicine (0.00001 M) Chortophaga neuroblast Mitotic poison—blocking agent
Diphenyl, Indoleacetic acid Wheat root Spindle rotation
Epinephrine (0.01%) Chicken fibroblast Mitotic poison—blocking agent
Methyl naphthohydroquinone diacetate Onion root Multipolar spindle induced
Morphine (0.0001 M) Chick epithelium Mitotic poison—blocking agent
Nicotine (0.0001 M) Rabbit fibroblast Mitotic poison—blocking agent
Phenylurethan Sea urchin egg Monopolar mitotic figure induced
Podophyllotoxin (10-7 M) Echinarachnius egg Mitotic poison—blocking agent
Streptomycin Onion root Reversion to interphase
Sulfanilamide Paracentrotus egg Mitotic poison—blocking agent
Testosterone, Estrone Rabbit fibroblast Abnormal chromosome orientation
Anaphase:
Caffeine Onion root Incomplete chromosome separation
Ryanodine Sand dollar egg Incomplete chromosome separation
Trypaflavine Rabbit fibroblast Incomplete chromosome separation
Telophase:
Aureomycin Chicken fibroblast Cytoplasmic division suppressed
Carbamate Sea urchin egg Cytoplasmic division suppressed
Chloroacetophenone Chicken osteoblast Nuclear reconstruction retarded
Nicotine Pea seedling Spindle remnant persists
Rotenone Sea urchin egg Cytoplasmic division suppressed
Thiourea Chicken fibroblast Nuclear reconstruction retarded
Interphase:
Acridines Chicken fibroblast Initiation of prophase inhibited
Azaguanine Mouse tumors Initiation of prophase inhibited
Dyes Frog sperm Initiation of prophase inhibited
Hypoxanthine Chicken osteoblast Interphase shortened
Glucose Mouse epidermis Division stimulated
Nitrogen mustard Rat corneal epithelium Initiation of prophase inhibited
Trypaflavine Onion root Destruction of interphase nucleus
Multiple Phases:
Aminobenzoate, Coumarin Onion root Chromosome breaks
Cysteine Protozoan Chromosome reduction induced
Dyes, N-butyl gallate Onion root Chromosome adhesion
Ethoxycaffeine Onion root Chromosome rearrangements
Mustards Spiderwort mother cell Centromere misdivision
Urea Fruit fly salivary gland Chromosome dispersion/despiralization
364 Nanomedicine • Volume I
cell denucleation;3722 there is at least one report of nuclear extrusion in
lymphocytes.3723 Selected organelle populations (e.g., mitochondria)
could also be ubiquinitized.
4. Antibiotics — Drugs that prevent bacteria from multiplying
(bacteriostatic) or that kill bacteria outright (bactericidal) are called
antibiotics; in 1998, ~100 such drugs were FDA approved for U.S.
use. Major groups include the aminoglycosides, cephalosporins,
macrolides, penicillins, polypeptides, quinolones, sulfonamides, and
tetracyclines;2119 many are naturally-derived products. All act by
interfering with protein synthesis, cell wall construction, or DNA
replication. For example, gonococci isolated in the preantibiotic
(pre-resistance) era were inhibited by benzylpenicillin
(C16H18N2O4S, MW = 334 daltons) in concentrations as low as ~7
molecules/micron3
;
2135 in the 1990s, some highly resistant bacterial
isolates required ~1000-fold higher concentrations. Vancomycin
derivatives are active against Gram-positive bacteria at 10-100 molecules/micron3
.
3227 Antibiotics are available with protein/RNA synthesis
inhibition activity against either prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells (Table
10.5).
5. Bactericidal Phages — Bacteriophages (viruses that infect
bacteria) are capable of penetrating bacterial membranes and
delivering foreign DNA which can take control of all metabolic
processes; in ~700 sec after penetration, the first complete virion
particles begin appearing in the cytoplasm; at ~1500 sec, the bacterium
bursts, necrotically liberating ~200 virus particles. These viruses are
often very host-specific. Still, it may be possible to design artificial
general-purpose bacteriophages that are capable of disabling or
destroying all bacterial DNA, or are capable of replicating more
bacteriophage particles to which only the targeted bacterial cells are
susceptible (see also Section 10.4.1.1). Engineered macrophages or
artificial neutrophils might also be deployed to achieve targeted
bacterial digestion. Reaching intracellular parasites such as mycoplasmas and rickettsias might be one of the biggest challenges for
such biorobots.
6. Bacteriocins — Probably 99% of all bacteria generate at least
one bacteriocin, small proteins that function as narrow-spectrum
antibiotics that may have developed as poisons to kill
competing bacteria.2121,3724-2726 In 1998, ~80 bacteriocins were
known, most of them produced by fermentation microbes, including
nisin which is used in 45 countries including the U.S. as a commercial
food additive for pasteurized egg products. Bacteriocins seem to work
by entering the outer membrane of a susceptible bacterium, congregating in groups, and forming pores that allow the unregulated
outflow of essential ions. The target bacterium begins breaking down
ATP in a vain attempt to produce enough new protons to recharge
the membrane, a futile cycle that quickly results in exhaustion of
bacterial ATP. Bacteriocins are most effective in acid and least effective
in salty environments. Bacteriocins of Gram-positive bacteria such
as Listeria and Clostridium botulinum are ineffective against
Gram-negative bacteria such as E. coli and Salmonella which have a
protective double-walled outer membrane. In 1998, several
Gram-negative bacteriocins were known. One example is the
colicins, water-soluble cytotoxins secreted by and active against
E. coli, that form voltage-sensitive ion channels in the bacterial
inner membrane that kill the cell by selectively siphoning out key
cell nutrients2150,2151 and inhibit protein synthesis.3190
7. Porins and Superporins — C. Sublette notes that it should be
possible to design and insert into a cell a piece of RNA or DNA
designed to produce high levels of a “superporin” protein that
migrates to the cell membrane, then self-assembles into a large
Table 10.5. Inhibitors of Protein or RNA Synthesis531,2119,2180
Biochemical Inhibitor Specific Molecular Inhibitory Effect
Acting Only on Prokaryotes:*
Chloramphenicol Blocks the peptidyl transferase reaction on ribosomes (MIC ~8-14 µg/cm3
)
Erythromycin Blocks the translocation reaction on ribosomes (MIC ~1-2 µg/cm3
)
Rifamycin Blocks initiation of RNA chains by binding to RNA polymerase (prevents
RNA synthesis) (MIC ~1 µg/cm3
)
Streptomycin Prevents the transition from the initiation complex to chain-elongating
ribosome and causes miscoding (MIC ~2-10 µg/cm3
; 800-4000 molecules/
cm3
)
Tetracycline Blocks binding of aminoacyl-tRNA to A-site of ribosome (MIC ~2-4 µg/cm3
)
Acting on Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes:
Actinomycin D Binds to DNA and blocks the movement of RNA polymerase (prevents RNA
synthesis)
Pyromycin Causes the premature release of nascent polypeptide chains by its addition
to growing end chain
Acting Only on Eukaryotes:
α-Amanitin Blocks mRNA synthesis by binding preferentially to RNA polymerase II
Anisomycin Blocks the peptidyl transferase reaction on ribosomes
Cycloheximide Blocks the translocation reaction on ribosomes
* The ribosomes of eukaryotic mitochondria (and chloroplasts) often resemble those of prokaryotes in their sensitivity to inhibitors
MIC = Minimum Inhibitory Concentration
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 365
channel in the membrane several orders of magnitude larger than
an ion channel, allowing a large, lethal ion influx or outflux. For
example, normal cytosolic Ca++ concentration ranges from 60-3000
ions/micron3
;
531 blood plasma concentration is ~106 ions/micron3
(Appendix B), but even cytosolic concentrations as low as ~104 ions/
micron3 may be toxic (Section 7.4.5.3). (See also Section 10.4.2.1.)
Possible templates for such subunits are the bacterial porins,2133
minus their charged amino acid residues lining the inner passage
which produce nonspecific aqueous diffusion channels across the
outermost LPS bacterial membrane, and granulysin,2165 perforin
and members of the amoebapore family2166,2167 which are thought
to damage target cell membranes by inducing formation of microscopic pores.
8. Ionophores — Ionophores are small hydrophobic molecules
that dissolve in lipid bilayers, thus increasing ion permeability of
cell membranes.531 Most are synthesized by microorganisms, presumably as biological weapons to weaken their competitors. There
two classes of ionophores—(highly temperature-sensitive) mobile
ion carriers, and channel formers—both operating by shielding the
charge of the transported ion so that it can penetrate the hydrophobic
interior of the lipid bilayer.531 (Ionophores permit net movement
only down their electrochemical gradients, since no energy sources
are available.) Valinomycin, a ring-shaped polymer that increases
K+ permeability of membranes, is an example of a mobile ion carrier.
Another example is A23187, which acts as an ion-exchange shuttle,
carrying two H+ out of the cell for every divalent cation (such as
Ca++ and Mg++) carried in. Transport rates through a mobile carrier
are ~2 x 104 ions/sec.531 A channel-forming ionophore is gramicidin
(C148H210N30O26, MW = 2822 daltons), a 15-residue linear
polypeptide with all hydrophobic side chains. Two such molecules
come together in the bilayer to form a transmembrane channel that
selectively allows monovalent cations (most readily H+
, K+ somewhat
less readily, Na+ still less readily) to flow down their electrochemical
gradients at a rate of ~2 x 107 cations/sec.531 The dimers are
unstable, constantly forming and dissociating, with average channel
open time ~1 sec.531 Gramicidin is produced by Bacillus brevis and
is active against Gram-positive cocci and bacilli. A 5 microgram dose
kills, in vitro, 109 pneumococci or group A streptococci in 2 hours at
30˚C,751 giving a fatal dose of ~1000 molecules/micron3 assuming
a ~1 cm3
 culture volume in this experiment.
9. Channel Blockers — Cells import and export nutrients, ions,
water, and wastes through variety of gated channels (Section 3.3.3)
and transporter molecular pumps (Section 3.4.1). If these channels
or pumps are permanently blocked, cytocide may
ensue. Blocking the ~103
/micron2 cellular transport systems
embedded in a typical eukaryotic cellular membrane requires
~103
/micron2
 “steric plugs” that permanently jam in the throat of
critical ion channels or pumps. For example, the acetylcholine
receptor channel narrows to ~0.65 nm at its waist, so an efficiently
designed steric plug could have a volume of ~1 nm3 or ~10-21 gm.
(By comparison, a single molecule of 318 dalton tetrodotoxin, or
puffer fish toxin, has mass ~0.53 x 10-21 gm; apparently, saxitoxin
(shellfish toxin, human IV lethal dose ~68 micrograms) and
palytoxin are slightly smaller, whereas botulin toxin is a fairly
high-mass zinc metalloprotease protein that inhibits release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction.) Plugging all channels in
the surface of a (2 micron)3 bacterial cell (~10 micron2
) or a (20
micron)3 tissue cell (~1000 micron2
) requires ~104 or ~106 plugs,
respectively, a nanorobot-dispensed ~10-5 micron3 or ~10-3 micron3
dosage of plugs at the target cell, assuming ~100% efficiency. A
mean migration distance per plug of ~1 micron gives a Brownian
diffusion time of ~1 millisec, so a micron-scale nanorobot with 0.1
micron3 of onboard storage carries sufficient plug-doses to incapacitate
~104
 bacterial cells in ~10 sec or ~102
 tissue cells in ~0.1 sec, ignoring
cell-to-cell travel time. Assuming a mean interbacterial separation
of ~100 microns (an implied pathogen number density of ~106
/cm3 in
the tissue) and a maximum nanodevice intercellular travel speed of
~100 micron/sec (Section 9.4.4.2), a nanorobot spends ~1 sec in
transit between neighboring bacterial cells, ~0.002 sec in cell-type
recognition (Section 8.5.2.2), and ~0.001 sec killing the bacterium
once the nanorobot arrives.
10. Channel Destroyers — Some smaller number (perhaps as few
as one) of an enzyme-like toxin molecule capable of destroying
either the steric or the electrochemical specificity of each ion channel
by permanently altering the physical structure of that channel. For
example, in the case of the acetylcholine receptor channel, an artificial
enzyme possibly could be designed to alter the ring of negatively
charged residues at the entrance to the receptor, allowing anions to
enter the pore and ultimately depolarizing the cell. Enzymes typically
operate at ~1000 Hz and the diffusion time across ~20 nm between
adjacent ion channels is ~0.5 microsec, so a single enzyme neutralizes
all 104 channels in a bacterial cell in ~10 sec and ~1000 artificial
enzymatic molecules would incapacitate the cell in ~10 millisec.
11. Complement — The complement system is a group of ~20
soluble serum-resident proteins acting in combination with specific
cytolysin antibodies in amplification cascades along two separate
pathways to initiate reactions to foreign antigens (Chapter 15).
Complement proteins are enzymes that act on foreign cells by
punching holes in their membranes by inserting lipid-soluble pores
(the membrane attack complex, C5-C9), causing necrotic osmotic
cytolysis. In addition, complement plus antibody designates cells to
be engulfed by phagocytic cells.
12. Animal Venoms and Toxins — The bufagin from the Bufo
arenarum toad of Argentina (arenobufagin, C25H34O6, MW = 430
daltons) has a mean lethal toxicity of 92 microgram/kg,585 the
equivalent of ~106 bufagin molecules per 20-micron tissue cell (~100
molecules/micron3
). Most reptile venoms have lethal toxicities of
200-1000 micrograms per kg of body weight.585 Sea anemone
granulitoxin (4958 daltons) has a mouse LD50 of 400 micrograms/kg
(~49 molecules/micron3
);3458 another sea anemone protein extract has
a mouse LD50 of 40 micrograms/kg.3459 Maurotoxin, a 34-residue
scorpion venom (Scorpio maurus), has an intracerebroventricular mouse
LD50 of ~80 nanograms,3460 or ~0.4 molecules/micron3
. The LD50
value to mice of Vespa luctuosa hornet venom is 1600 micrograms/kg,
the most lethal known wasp venom.3457 Venoms and toxins may not
be cytocidal against all cell types—some act by interfering with nerve
transmission or by paralyzing muscles.
13. Plant and Microbial Toxins — A variety of microbes manufacture neurotoxins or neurolysins that destroy the ability of human
ganglion and cortical neural cells to function.3461 A single molecule
of some neurotoxins can incapacitate a cell, though the rate of
action tends to be very slow. For example, botulin toxin is the second
deadliest poison known (e.g., median human lethality ~5-50 nanograms/kg).3462 The toxin acts at cholinergic nerve terminals to prevent
acetylcholine release, a permanent physiologic denervation that
causes muscle paralysis, often resulting in death by respiratory system
failure in 2-8 days. Recovery requires the sprouting of new axon
twigs and the formation of new myoneural junctions,2122 which is
366 Nanomedicine • Volume I
why the recovery time for sub-lethal botulin poisoning is very long,
several months to a year or more. Botulin is a ~150,000-dalton protein
comprised of 1285 amino acid,2171,3462 which implies a
lethal concentration of 0.2-2 molecules per 20-micron tissue cell.
Other toxins are capable of killing a cell outright with just a few
molecules, such as ricin: mouse and rabbit IV LD50 ~400-4000 nanograms/kg or 30-300 molecules per 20-micron tissue cell,3463-3465
possibly due to lower specificity in binding to cells and other pharmacokinetic effects). Ricin is a phytotoxic enzymatic 65,750-dalton
protein3466 taken from the seeds of the castor oil plant that cleaves the
ribosome complexes, shutting down protein manufacturing. This
damage is normally irreversible, killing the organism in ~4 days at
minimum dosage and ~8 hours at the highest dosages, so a reasonable
lower limit for killing an individual cell is probably ~104
 sec.
14. Antifungals — Antifungal agents such as amphotericin B or
fluconazole are fungistatic. For example, the growth of Candida and
many other fungi is inhibited by amphotericin B (C47H73NO17,
MW = 924 daltons) concentrations of 30-1000 micrograms/cm3 in
vitro.2119 A number of natural antimicrobial peptides are induced
in epithelial cells at sites of inflammation; for example, lingual antimicrobial peptide (LAP), a member of the b-defensin class, has been
isolated from bovine tongue and exhibits both antifungal (e.g.,
Candida) and antibacterial (e.g., E. coli) activity2129 at concentrations
as low as ~16 microgram/cm3
.In 1998, antifungals were known to
target membrane function, metabolism, cell wall synthesis, protein and
ergosterol synthesis, nuclear division, and nucleic acid synthesis and
function.2131 In those circumstances where fungal cells have learned
to communicate to effect mating or cooperative behaviors, such
communication may be disrupted to their detriment. If the genetic
pathways involved in these behaviors include primitive forms of
apoptosis, these could be exploited as well.
15. Antivirals — Antiviral drugs may work by interfering with
viral replication processes, including cell attachment, cell uptake,
viral coat removal, and viral DNA or RNA replication by the cell,
and are primarily virostatic. For example, acyclovir (MW = 225
daltons) in concentrations of 0.01-13.5 micrograms/cm3 inhibits
by 50% the growth of herpes simplex virus in vitro.2119 In 1998, ~20
antivirals were FDA approved for U.S. use. Antibodies may also
serve a virostatic function. For example, the rabies-like vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) rhabdovirus has a surface envelope with ~1200
identical glycoprotein molecules that form a regular and densely
ordered pattern of spike tips.2139 Rhabdoviruses are neutralized if
they cannot dock with their cellular receptors; this requires a minimum of 200-500 IgG antibody molecules bound per virion.2140
Another challenge for medical nanorobots will be the retroviruses,
which insert their genome into the host DNA, thus will require
chromosomal editing or replacement (Chapter 20) to remove.
16. Iodine-Based Microbicides (iodophors) — In tincture of
iodine, all of the iodine is in the free form at ~10% by weight and is
readily available for instantaneous reaction and killing of bacteria in a
few seconds.360The minimum lethal iodine dose for a 2-micron bacterium (assuming complete exhaustion of a 0.1-micron perimicrobial
iodophor layer) may be of order ~0.001 picomoles or ~0.1 picogram
iodine (~108 molecules), which is ~3% of the mass of a bacterium—
not terribly efficient, as expected for a broad-spectrum agent. Iodoacetate
inactivates most cytoplasmic enzymes and blocks anaerobic metabolism, or glycolysis (fluoride is also a glycolytic poison).758 Yodoxin (64%
organically bound iodine) is amoebicidal.2119 The
broadest-known spectrum iodine-based microbicide is betadine
(povidone-iodine) 10% solution,2119 employed in surgical scrub and
many other general antiseptic uses. Betadine kills most bacteria in 15-30
sec, and also kills viruses, fungi, yeasts and protozoa; no bacterial
resistance has been reported.
17. Silver — Silver foil has been used in bacteriocidal wound
dressings,2158 and silver metal has been employed for centuries
to purify water. In 1998, there were more than 600 silver-based antibacterial products available in Japan including silver-impregnated pens,
floppy disks, calculators, ATM machines, floor tiles, plastic food wrap,
socks, shirts, public park sand, and toilet seats.2126 At least 20
companies in the U.S. offer silver/copper-based systems for swimming
pool sanitation and commercial air conditioning cooling towers. The
passive dissociation of silver from the metallic phase into a wound with
antimicrobial results2123 and the antiseptic action of silver compounds2124 are well known. A quantitative study of the metal’s antimicrobial properties in vitro found that a silver ion concentration of ~25
micrograms/cm3 (~105 ions/micron3
) reduced the number density of
Staphylococcus and Pseudomonas bacterial cells and Candida fungal cells
by a factor of 1-10 million relative to microbial control aliquots.2125
18. Platinum, Bismuth, and Other Elements — Platinum-based
cisplatin (PtCl2H6N2, MW = 300 daltons) is an antitumor and
bacteriostatic drug that interacts with tumor-cell DNA by forming a
Pt-GG intrastrand crosslink as the critical lesion leading to cytotoxicity.2136 A typical ~100 mg whole-body dose2119 produces a mean concentration of ~2000 molecules/micron3
. Colloidal bismuth subcitrate
exerts a direct antimicrobial effect against H. pylori (gastritis) at
concentrations of 4-25 micrograms/cm3 (6000-38,000 molecules/
micron3
), with treated bacteria showing deposits of bismuth on their
surface and internally.2137 Mercury (chronic toxicity in blood ~600
atoms/micron3
), lead (toxic in blood at ~2900 atoms/micron3
), and
arsenic (toxic in blood at ~4800 atoms/micron3
) are general poisons
(Appendix B) that have been used for medicinal purposes. Indirect
poisons such as iron and copper catalyze free-radical formation.
Interestingly, bacterial growth is constrained by essential nutrients,
and human immune cells scavenge and sequester iron when faced with
a bacterial threat; nanorobotic “deferritization” of a bacterium could
kill the organism.
19. Sugar — Medical lore has it that sugar, and especially
honey2158,2334 (Section 1.2.1.2), makes an excellent antibacterial disinfectant. Blood glucose levels of 0.01-0.07 M in untreated diabetics
cause tissue and cellular damage, at least partly via osmotic cellular
dehydration (honey and NaCl salt have a similar effect), and protein
glycosylation and Maillard reaction (Section 6.3.4.4) which diminish
enzyme function; ~15% cytosolic glucose concentrations are toxic.
20. Hydrogen-Bond and Disulfide-Bond Breaking Agents — At high
concentrations, guanidine hydrochloride disintegrates the bacterial
S-layer coat which is held together only by noncovalent forces.525 Local
heating (hyperthermia; Section 10.4.2.3) also disrupts H-bonds. Other
agents are available to break disulfide bonds, disrupting many classes of
proteins.
21. Nuclear Alkalination and Other Nucleic Disruption— RNA breaks
down in slightly alkaline environments (e.g., pH  8.0;1591 to increase
the pH of a typical cellular nucleus from 7.2 to 8.0 would require the
injection of ~105 OH- ions. RNA is also broken down by RNases;
DNA is broken down by DNases, or by using restriction enzymes.
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 367
22. Tissue Liquefaction — A 2-hour exposure to 0.25% trypsin
enzyme solution digests and breaks up the extracellular matrix,570
turning an organized tissue into a jumble of individual cells.
23. Other Poisons — Cyanide causes cells to swell and lyse at
concentrations of ~0.002 M (~1 x 106 ions/micron3
).758
Assuming serum reference levels, ethanol should be cytotoxic at
~0.09 M (~50 x 106 molecules/micron3
).1604 Ethylene oxide
(C2H4O) gas is a microbial sterilant and fumigant; chlorine
dioxide (chlorite ion) is an antimicrobial sometimes found in
mouthwashes. Chlorine and bromine are used as antibacterials in
swimming pools and hot tubs. Most chemotherapy agents also kill
cells. Common lab detergents such as Triton X-100 and tributyl
phosphate readily destroy bacteria and the majority of viruses
sheathed in protein envelopes.3252
Nanorobot biocidal delivery vehicles can be used to present the
chemical agent on a cell-by-cell basis. For example, a major
whole-body infection involving ~1012 pathogens (e.g., ~106 bacteria/
cm3
) with each microbe capable of being killed by ~105
precisely-delivered biocidal molecules each of molecular weight
~1000 daltons requires a minimum treatment dose of ~1017 biocidal molecules or ~0.1 mm3 of material. This dose could be carried
and dispensed in ~1000 sec by one billion ~1 micron3 “pharmacyte”
nanorobots (total volume of therapeutic nanorobots ~0.001 cm3
)
assuming each nanorobot has ~0.1 micron3 of internal storage for
the biocidal agent and assuming as before a mean ~1 sec cell-to-cell
transit time.
10.4.2 Mechanical Cytocide and Virucide
Mechanical cytocide involves the killing of biological cells or the
destruction of virion particles partially or primarily by mechanical,
rather than by strictly biochemical, means. Such means may include
disablement, partial physical destruction of critical components, or
even complete disassembly of the target cell, bacterium, or viral
particle.
10.4.2.1 Transmembrane Siphonation and Ionic Disequilibration
A number of rigid diamondoid tubes with membrane-locking
lipophilic external coatings and hydrophilic end rings may be
inserted through the target cell membrane, preventing self-sealing
of the breach (Section 9.4.5.6) and resulting in drainage of internal
fluids and disruption of ionic balances, probably triggering apoptosis
in eukaryotic cells after ~104
 sec.
What magnitude of siphonage may be required to achieve cell
lethality? A cytosolic concentration of 104 Ca++ ions/micron3 is
believed to be toxic (Section 7.4.5.3) and there are ~106 Ca++ ions/
micron3 present in blood plasma (Appendix B) or interstitial fluid,
so replacing ~1% of cell volume (e.g., ~0.1 micron3 for a bacterium,
~80 micron3 for a tissue cell) with raw extracellular fluid should be
lethal. Macrophages can ingest up to ~25% of their volume per
hour,996 or ~10% of their volume in ~1000 sec, but the paramecium, a
large protozoan, excretes through its contractive vacuole a quantity
of water equal to 100% of its volume in 15-20 minutes,758 or ~10%
in ~100 sec.
Conservatively assuming that a ~10% target cell volume influx
of extracellular fluid in 1 sec will cause serious cell damage or
induce apoptosis, the size and number of passive transmembrane
siphons may be crudely estimated. Mean interstitial fluid pressure
is ~0.0002 atm (Section 8.4.2). Thus from Eqn. 9.25, the total volume
flow rate through water-bearing transmembrane tubes of length ltube
= 300 nm with pressure differential ∆p ~ 0.0002 atm is VHP = 4 x 1010
Ntube rtube
4 (m3
/sec) for Ntube tubes each of inside radius rtube. To
exchange 10% of the volume of a ~2 micron diameter bacterium by
siphonation with extracellular fluids in ~1 sec (VHP ~ 1 micron3
/sec)
requires one tube of radius rtube ~ 70 nm. For a ~20 micron tissue
cell, VHP ~ 1000 micron3
/sec which requires one tube of
radius rtube ~ 400 nm or 15 tubes of radius rtube ~ 200 nm.
It is important that passive siphon tubes should be employed in
minimum numbers and never be left unattended. They should be
tethered to the nanorobot during use and retrieved after each use.
Left unattended in the plasma membrane of a dying cell, diamondoid
siphon tubes could become serious systemic poisons. For example,
macrophages phagocytosing apoptotic siphon-studded cells would
be unable to digest the tubes and might themselves become
accidentally siphoned, or might pass the lethal tubes to other innocent
cells in the liver, spleen, or elsewhere.
Death by siphonation may be hastened if the nanorobot actively
pumps extracellular fluids (or cations directly) into the target cytosol. A
pressure differential of ~1 atm applied along a simple bulk fluid
injector with rtube = 50 nm and ltube = 300 nm gives VHP ~ 1000
micron3
/sec and draws ~76 pW of power during the transfer.
Artificial cytocidal cation inflows must surpass the net natural
cellular outpumping rates of those cations. For instance, there are
at least five known Ca++ concentration-maintenance mechanisms
in eukaryotic cells:
1. a cell membrane ATP-driven Ca++ exporting pump,
2. a cell membrane 3Na+/Ca++ exchange transporter,
3. a Ca++ transporter into the mitochondria,
4. a 2Na+/Ca++ exchange transporter into the mitochondria, and
5. an ATP-driven Ca++ pump into the endoplasmic reticulum.3146
What is the maximum natural outflow rate? Normal cytosolic Ca++
concentration ranges from 60 ions/micron3 for a resting cell up to
3000 ions/micron3 for an activated cell (Section 7.4.5.3). From Eqn.
3.4, the diffusion-limited ion current through the surface of a
20-micron tissue cell is ~2 x 107 ions/sec for a resting cell and ~109
ions/sec for an activated cell. Taking the extracellular concentration
of ~106 Ca++ ions/micron3 gives a minimum lethal extracellular bulk
fluid inflow rate of ~1000 micron3
/sec to defeat the maximum
possible pumping rate of an activated 20-micron cell, consistent
with the previous estimate. (The diffusion limit for a nanorobot
pumping Ca++ from the interstitial fluid into the cytosol is ~3 x 1011
ions/sec, far higher than the maximum rate at which the cell can
outpump.) Similarly, Na+/K+ transporters present in the
eukaryotic membrane at 1000/micron2
, each device transporting
500 ions/sec (Section 3.4.1), move at most ~109 ions/sec through
the ~2400 micron2 (Table 8-17) plasma membrane. The Na+
/K+
pumping cost is ~16 zJ/ion (Section 3.4.1); devoting the entire 30 pW
power budget of the typical cell (Section 6.5.1) to such pumping would
allow the transport of ~2 x 109 cations. Thus, >1000 molecular sorting
rotors each operating at ~106 ions/rotor-sec (Section 3.4.2)—the
entire array transporting >109 ion/sec—should allow an attacking
nanorobot to defeat a cell’s attempts to resist ionic disequilibration.
10.4.2.2 Mechanical Cytoskeletolysis and Monkeywrenching
It may have occurred to the alert reader that a simple way to kill
a eukaryotic cell might be to cytopenetrate and then motor around
inside the cytoplasm at higher-than-recommended velocities, thus
indiscriminately bursting lysosomes, shredding the thin membranes
of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi, and trashing other
368 Nanomedicine • Volume I
delicate cellular structures, depending upon the motility mechanism
employed (Section 9.4). Such a course would almost certainly result
in an unwanted necrotic cellular lysis.
Rupture of lysosomes (Section 8.5.3.8) should especially be
avoided because lysosomal lipases and other corrosive enzymes would
be released into the cytosol, possibly provoking some autolysis,
local disintegration of the plasma membrane, and inflammation.
Peroxisome (Section 8.5.3.9) rupture may produce similar effects,
since these organelles catalyze some of the fatty acid breakdown in
the cell. Selective destruction of ribosomes (Section 8.5.3.4), the
ER (Section 8.5.3.5), the Golgi complex (Section 8.5.3.6), the
mitochondria (Section 8.5.3.10), or the nucleus (Section 8.5.4)
will more slowly kill the cell but again this may be a nonapoptotic
death if the transcription, protein synthesis, or energizing mechanisms
necessary to sustain the apoptotic cascade are disabled. Loss of power
due to mitochondrial destruction eliminates the cell’s ability to
maintain long-term membrane recycling; the cell will eventually
come apart due to the accumulated damage in the membrane.
However, elements of the cytoskeleton probably can be safely
destroyed without disabling apoptosis, while simultaneously severely
reducing the chances of post-attack cell survival, particularly in cells
that are incapable of further division. Chemical cytoskeletolysis by
caspases (Section 10.4.1.1) and various mitotic inhibitors such as
the microtubule inhibitor vincristine (Sections 9.4.7.4 and 10.4.1.3)
have been described earlier. We can speculate that mechanical
cytoskeletolysis may trigger apoptosis in eukaryotic cells because
the entire cytoskeletal structure per se does not appear to be a crucial
operational component of the apoptotic cascade.
How best to perform the cytoskeletolysis? Microtubules in cyto
preferentially absorb light at ~350 nm,1070 so in theory a sufficiently
intense laser source at this frequency could selectively disrupt the
microtubule network. However, proteolytic or mechanical chopping
should be more energy efficient (especially if used to activate a few
of the molecules at the upstream end of the cascade). For example,
p56 severs microtubules slowly in an ATP-independent manner;3147
katanin is a heterodimeric protein that severs and disassembles
microtubules in an ATP-dependent manner.3148 Human elongation
factor 1α (EF-1α, ~48 kilodaltons) rapidly severs taxol-stabilized
fluorescent microtubules in vitro, and induces rapid fragmentation
of cytoplasmic microtubule arrays when microinjected into fibroblasts, at concentrations of 15 microgram/cm3 (200 molecules/
micron3
).1083 In theory, a pair of fiber cleavage tools modeled after
EF-1α operating at ~500 Hz (Section 9.4.6) would lyse ~1000 fibers/sec. If the cytoskeleton of a typical tissue cell has a total of
~106 intermediate filament segments (Table 8.17), then 10% of all
such filaments can be mechanochemically cleaved by a single tool
pair in ~100 sec, ignoring travel time.
The cytoskeleton can also be mechanically cleaved. Individual
microfilaments have a tensile tearing strength of ~0.1 nN,
microtubules ~1 nN, and intermediate filaments (IFs) ~100 nN.
Consider a cutting blade of length 50 nm rotating at ~1 KHz (blade
tip speed ~ 0.3 mm/sec). The energy required to cut a single 10-nm
thick IF is ~ 0.001 pJ (Section 9.3.5.1); the power required to cut
10% of all cellular IFs in ~100 sec is ~1 pW. The continuous drag
power of the freely rotating blade in plasma during the 100-sec
cytoskeletolysis program is ~0.1 pW (Eqn. 9.75). A 1-micron2
cross-section nanorobot traversing the entire 8000 micron3 volume
of a 20-micron tissue cell traces an 8000-micron path, a 100-sec
travel time at a mean ~80 microns/sec velocity; continuous
nanorobot drag power at this velocity even in a cytoskeleton-rich
cytoplasm of viscosity ~10 kg/m-sec (Section 9.4.6) is ~1 pW (Eqn.
9.73).
Another simple technique for mechanical disruption of the cell
may informally be termed “monkeywrenching.” As examples,
active DNA cutters (e.g., restriction enzymes), or in situ manufactured H2O2 along with some iron borrowed from local ferritin
molecules, could be injected into the eukaryotic nucleus, rapidly
generating enough double-strand breaks to activate the fatal DNA
damage response. R. Bradbury notes that a nanorobot could seize
a single mitochondrion (~0.4% of nuclear volume; Table 8.17),
transport it to the nuclear envelope and then forcibly insert it into
the nucleus—if there are sufficient oxygen and other small reactant
molecules present, the mitochondrion would probably produce
enough local free radicals to initiate the DNA-damage (apoptotic)
cascade. Methods for synthesizing superoxide, hydrogen peroxide,
and hypochlorite from locally available materials are described in
Chapter 19. In the case of prokaryotes, medical nanorobots could
introduce restriction enzyme molecules that are alien to the target
strain of bacterium, followed by some DNase (in case the strain has
none). R. Bradbury believes that ribonucleases and peptidases may
be unnecessary because some endogenous ribonucleases should
always be present and the remaining lipid bag of proteins would
not represent much of a threat.
10.4.2.3 Gross Cellular Disruption
A number of crude cytocidal techniques have been proposed
which for the most part are inadvisable. For instance, simple lancing
or “harpooning” of cells (e.g., Feynman’s “stab the paramecium”355)
would likely be followed by self-sealing or a messy necrosis, depending
on the duration and severity of the penetration.* Acoustic shock waves
would cause random mechanical damage, ending in necrosis. Bulk
pressurization (see Section 10.3.3) can be lethal to biology—high
pressure treatment to kill bacteria was first described in 1895 by
Royer,3102 and by Hite and colleagues3105 in 1899 in connection
with the high pressure preservation of milk. Cells are generally
inactivated between 2000-5000 atm, bacteria and viruses above 5000
atm, antibodies and enzymes over 10,000-20,000 atm (Table 10.3).
Bacterial spores are killed at ~6000 atm and 45˚C - 60˚C.3103,3104 A
pressure-initiated apoptotic response might be difficult to control
because the apoptosis-inducing and necrosis-inducing pressure
thresholds are not widely separated and may vary among cell types,
physiological states, external conditions, and even among cells of
apparently similar characteristics. Bulk pressurization followed by
release would almost certainly permanently inactivate viruses (Table
10.3), but could lead to inflammation if large populations of
deactivated viruses are set adrift in the tissues.
Some fragmentation of DNA molecules in aqueous solution by
~1 MHz ultrasound irradiation has been reported at intensities as
low as ~2000 watts/m2 for >15-min exposures, but 10-min exposures
to 50,000 watts/m2 completely fragment the DNA, due to shearing
forces acting on the large molecules rather than cavitation (which
requires higher intensities).730 Plant cell chromosomal damage
occurs at 104
-105 watts/m2
, and red blood cell suspensions suffer
increased membrane permeability but no membrane disruption up
to 30,000 watts/m2
, although platelets in aqueous suspension may
be disrupted by >2000 watts/m2
 at 1 MHz for >5 min.730
Local hyperthermia can selectively destroy cancer cells in vivo,505
presumably with an apoptotic outcome. Temperatures of 42.5˚C or
higher for 20-30 minutes appear necessary for tumoricidal effects,
and several sessions are needed for significant tumor regression.
*Self-sealing of ruptured neurons is inhibited by administering cysteine protease inhibitors or calmodulin inhibitors.3664
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 369
Focused 1 MHz ultrasound beams produce brain lesions, with in
situ spatial-peak intensities at 2 megawatts/m2 for 10 sec causing
purely thermal damage and higher intensities up to 0.2 gigawatts/
m2 for 300 microsec adding a contribution from direct mechanical
effect, possibly cavitation.505 Large numbers of nanorobots in a small
tissue volume could produce significant localized or cell-wide heating
for extended durations that might be difficult or impossible for
individual nanorobots to achieve.
Very high intensity laser light (>1011 watts/m2
) can necrotically
“optocute” biological cells;1630,1631 bioparticle optical trapping pioneer
A. Ashkin notes that during his experiments, “if the power got too
high, the bacteria would just explode.”2145 Threshold laser ablation
rates are ~1 nJ/micron2 for a 248-nm KrF excimer laser
photoablating organic material2146 and 0.5 nJ/micron2 for ablative
etching of corneal tissue at 193 nm (probably as a result of photodecomposition of the peptide bonds).645 At 193 nm, a single
20-nanosec, 20 nJ/micron2 (~1012 watt/m2
) pulse ablates 2.4
microns of bile duct tissue;645 hard biomaterials like tooth dentine
and dental enamel ablate 0.5-1.9 microns at 248 nm and a fluence
of ~1013 watts/m2
. Microlasers are an established technology,497 but
such methods produce necrosis and require far too much power to
be practical for in vivo cytocide.
However, ultraviolet UVC band photons (190-290 nm) induce
cell destruction645 much more selectively and energy-efficiently. For
example, nucleic acids have an optical absorption maximum near
~260 nm508,997 that is characteristic for each base;997 the absorption of
DNA itself is ~40% less than would be displayed by a mixture of
free nucleotides of the same composition, known as the hypochromic
effect.997 The primary mode of UV damage is the formation of
thymine dimers in the DNA, which block both transcription and
replication until repaired. In sufficient numbers, these defects
probably activate the DNA damage response (repair or apoptotic)
pathways. At higher-energy shorter wavelengths (e.g., 193 nm), the
UV photons don’t penetrate the cell far enough to reach the
nucleus.645 Lower-energy longer-wavelength UV photons can still
damage DNA by producing oxidizing chromophores and decreasing
enzyme synthesis, which has the effect of reducing the repair and
regrowth properties of DNA;645 protein containing the aromatic
(chromophoric) amino acids tryptophan and tyrosine have maximum
absorption near 275 nm508,996 and phenylalanine more weakly near
260 nm,996 and peptide bonds absorb strongly at wavelengths
under 240 nm.508 Thus photons of a precise wavelength can cause
very selective damage. Suspensions of Streptococcus, Lactobacilli and
Actinomyces bacteria stained with toluidene blue experienced
millionfold kill rates after 60-sec exposure to helium-neon laser
photons at an intensity of only 5600 watts/m2
.
2147 Viral genetic
material is also strongly susceptible to UV damage.328
Particulate radiation is another poor choice for inflicting selective
damage to individual cells in a controlled manner. It is true that Co60
irradiation is used to sterilize sutures,359 and antitumor radiation
treatments have been commonplace in 20th century medicine.
However, the range of natural-emission α-rays in protoplasm is
>20 microns, raising the likelihood of some collateral damage, and
an accelerator capable of generating artificial lower-energy alpha
beams would be energetically and geometrically prohibitive in most
in vivo nanomedical contexts.
10.4.2.4 Mechanical Virucide
Viruses are acellular bioactive parasites that attack virtually
every form of cellular life. Viruses have diameters2148 ranging from
16-300 nm—for example, poliomyelitis ~18 nm, yellow fever ~25
nm, influenza ~100 nm, herpes simplex and rabies ~125 nm, and
psittacosis ~275 nm.751 Their shape is either pseudospherical with
icosahedral symmetry, as in the poliomyelitis virus, or rodlike, as in
the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). Viruses consist of a core of RNA
(most plant viruses and animal viruses such as the rhinoviruses, polio
and flu viruses, and all retroviruses) or DNA (most bacterial and
some animal viruses), but never both. This nuclear material is
surrounded by a protein coat called a capsid, a quasi-symmetrical
structure assembled from one or only a few protein subunits called
capsomeres. A virus surrounded only by capsid is a naked virus;
some viruses acquire a lipid membrane envelope from their host
cell upon release, and are called enveloped viruses. Attached to the
capsid are other protein structures necessary for host infection,
especially attachment or docking proteins. The interior capsid
volume is usually only slightly larger, and never more than twice
as large, as the volume of the enclosed nuclear material.997 For
instance, the adenovirus (one family of viruses that causes the
common cold in humans) is an icosahedral particle ~70 nm in
diameter (~180,000 nm3
) containing one double-stranded DNA
molecule ~11 microns (~35,000 bases or ~107 daltons) in length
(~15,000 nm3
), giving a composition of approximately 92% protein
and 8% DNA by volume. By comparison, the TMV has 5% nucleic
acid, the bushy stunt virus 17%, and the tobacco ringspot virus has
40%.751
There are at least two methods by which such viruses may be
eliminated from the human body, as follows.
10.4.2.4.1 Sequester and Transport (ST)
Nanorobots may extend chemosensory pads (Section 4.2.8)
which will selectively and reversibly adhere to the capsid coat of a
nonenveloped viral target. For enveloped viruses, the nanorobot must
carefully pick over the camouflage lipid membrane to find
viral-specific antigens. R. Bradbury suggests that such lipid-coated
viruses might also be distinguishable from host cells by measuring
their membrane curvature (viruses are much smaller than eukaryotic
cells) or local ion concentrations (viruses emit no metabolic effluents).
Once the virus is bound to the pad, the nanorobot packs the
whole virus particle into an internal storage cannister. When the
cannister is full, the nanorobot ceases operations and either delivers
its cargo to a dedicated biodisposal organ or other in vivo facility, or
eliminates itself from the body (Chapter 16). A nanorobot with a
1.8 micron3 cannister can warehouse up to ~10,000 compacted
adenovirus particles. With viral infections reaching ~1010 particles/
cm3 localized in the upper respiratory mucosal tissues, mean distance
between free-floating particles is of order ~5 microns, or ~100
millisec travel time at ~100 micron/sec, probably dominating the
exclusive antigenic identification time of ~2 millisec (Section 8.5.2.2).
As part of a nanomedical treatment for viral infection3233 (Chapter
23), a minimum therapeutic dosage of ~108 nanorobots/cm3 can
extract and sequester the entire adenovirus population from infected
human tissue in ~1000 sec (~17 minutes); larger doses can clear the
tissues even faster, and may also assist in the cytoplasmic and nucleoplasmic clearance of viral DNA.
10.4.2.4.2 Digest and Discharge (DD)
After virion acquisition as previously described, the particle is
placed in a leakproof transfer chamber. The virus is then pistoned
into a morcellation chamber (Section 9.3.5.1) where it is chopped
by orthogonally traveling diamondoid blades into ~10 nm pieces,
greatly increasing the reactive surface area of the virus material. The
morcellate is then pistoned into a reaction chamber. Capsid-specific
proteinases and peptidases are introduced, reducing all virus proteins
to amino acids, which are removed from solution by molecular sorting
370 Nanomedicine • Volume I
rotors (Section 3.4.2) and discharged. Lipases are required for digesting
enveloped viruses. Deoxyribonuclease and ribonuclease enzymes are
also introduced, reducing viral DNA or RNA to nucleotides which
are themselves removed from the solution by a second set of molecular
sorting rotors and discharged. The enzymes remaining in solution
are pumped back into storage vessels via sorting rotors, and the
reaction chamber is ready for the next cycle.
For example, a 70-nm adenovirus particle containing 8% DNA
by weight is reduced to 1.7 x 10-16 gm (~106 molecules) of amino
acids and 1.4 x 10-17 gm (~30,000 molecules) of nucleotides. Natural
bloodstream concentrations of all amino acids are typically ~5 x
10-5 gm/cm3 (~3 x 1011 adenovirus equivalents per cm3
), and ~10-6
gm/cm3 (~7 x 1010 adenovirus equivalents per cm3
) for nucleotides
(Appendix B), so the maximum “safe” viral material discharge rate
appears nucleotide-limited to ~1011 virus particles per cm3
, which
is at or above the typical virion particle density in serious infections.
Hence, digested-virus material discharges should not significantly
augment natural serum concentrations of amino acids or nucleotides.
Energy costs are minimal. Single-virus mincing costs ~0.1 pW
of power for a duration of ~8 millisec (Eqn. 9.54). Representative
enzyme operating frequencies (turnover numbers) range from 1-2
KHz for lactate dehydrogenase and penicillinase to 15-100 Hz for
DNA polymerase and chymotrypsin,759 giving digestion times on
the order of 1-100 millisec when an excess of enzyme is present.
Out-rotoring all final-product amino acids costs at most ~ 20 pW
for at most ~10 millisec duration using ~100 sorting rotors per each
of the 20 essential amino acid types. Pumping a generous ~100
virus-volumes of enzyme-rich solution through a 1-micron length
of 60-nm diameter pipe at 1 atm pressure costs 2 pW for ~ 1 millisec
duration (Section 9.2.5). Hence virion processing time is of order
~100 millisec and requires at most ~30 pW during processing.
10.4.2.5 Mechanical Bacteriocide
Bacteria are unicellular microorganisms capable of independent
metabolism, growth, and replication. Their shapes are generally
spherical or ovoid (cocci), cylindrical or rodlike (bacilli), and
curved-rod, spiral or comma-like (spirilla). Bacilli may remain
associated after cell division and form colonies configured like strings
of sausages. Bacteria range in size from 0.2-2 microns in width or
diameter, and from 1-10 microns in length for the nonspherical
species; the largest known bacterium is Thiomargarita namibiensis,
with spheroidal diameters from 100-750 microns.3225 Spherical
bacteria as small as 50-500 nm in diameter have been reported,2149
but it has been theorized that the smallest possible cell size into
which the minimum essential molecular machinery can be contained
within a membrane is a diameter of ~40-50 nm.527 Many spherical
bacteria are ~1 micron in diameter; an average rod or short spiral
cell is ~1 micron wide and 3-5 microns long. Each bacterial cell
consists of a mass of protoplasm enclosed within the usual thin lipid
bilayer plasma membrane. Most Gram-positive bacteria are surrounded
by a thick, mechanically strong but porous peptidoglycan cell wall.
Gram-negative bacteria like E. coli surround themselves with an
additional two-layer coat atop the peptidoglycan layer. This coat
has an unsaturated inner lipid layer but a more rigid outer leaflet
composed of an unusual lipid, called lipopolysaccharide (LPS), in
which fatty acid chains are all saturated and 6-7 chains are
covalently linked in a single LPS molecule.2134
Bacterial cells have no internal membranous surfaces and no
internal organelles, although some functional compartmentalization does
exist.3616 Bacteria possess small internal vacuoles, ribosomes, and granules of stored food, and usually one or more externally-attached flagella
(Section 9.4.2.5.2). Some rod-shaped bacteria can form tiny spherical
or oval endospores that survive when conditions become inhospitable for metabolism, such as extreme heat (>100˚C) or desiccation
(for up to 60 years).1225As prokaryotes, bacteria have no distinct nucleus.
However, a single circular chromosome is organized into one or more
compact aggregates, called nucleoids, that may occupy about
one-third of cell volume.997 E. coli, a well-studied cylindrical bacterium measuring 0.65 microns wide and 1.7
microns long (cell volume ~ 0.6 micron3
), has one double-stranded
DNA chromosome ~1.3 mm (~4.2 megabases or ~109 daltons) in
length (strand volume ~ 0.002 micron3
), organized in ~40 kilobase
loops.997 Chromosomes spilled from lysed bacteria show ~80% DNA
content, suggesting loop stabilization by proteins and at least a primitive membrane-associated cytoskeleton.
Table 10.6 gives the approximate mean composition of a 4
micron3 bacterium. There are at least three methods for eliminating
an unwelcome microbe from the human body, described below. An
additional serious problem in bacterial infections is that many
microbes release toxins into the bloodstream that can wreak havoc
even if all the bacteria are killed. Toxin cleanup (Chapter 19) is a
necessary component of any comprehensive antibacterial treatment
strategy.
10.4.2.5.1 Desiccate, Sequester and Transport (DST)
After the target bacterium has been identified by chemosensory
pads binding, the nanorobot secures itself to the cell exterior. The
first objective is to desiccate the bacterium. An efficiently designed
molecular sorting rotor for water may require ~30 nm2
/receptor of
exposed surface with 600 nm3
/rotor which includes 50% volume
overhead for housings and other mechanical elements, and transports
~106 molecules/sec at a cost of ~0.01 pW/rotor (Section 3.4.2). Of
total bacterial water, ~2/3 is freely diffusible as bulk water and ~1/3
is loosely bound as hydration water (Section 8.5.3.3). Thus to
accomplish the desiccation, the nanorobot inserts a 0.3-micron wide,
2-micron long cylindrical water extraction probe into the cell interior.
Taking the experimentally measured3149 failure strength of the wet
peptidoglycan wall as ~3 x 106 N/m2 (Table 9.3), a probe tip configured as a core sampler tool (Section 9.3.2) with an annular cutting
edge of thickness Wedge = 1 nm (Section 9.3.5.1) can penetrate the
bacterial wall by applying a force of ~3 nN perpendicular to the
surface; a rotating serrated cutting edge requires even less force. In
the alternative, a chemical or enzymatic cutting tool may be
employed.3150-3152
The extraction probe is tiled with ~66,000 sorting rotors of
volume ~0.04 micron3
. Extraction probe volume is ~0.14 micron3
,
which leaves ~0.10 micron3 for probe structure, probe plumbing
manifold, pipes and pumps, and probe control mechanisms. All
bulk water is extracted from the bacterium in ~1 sec, shrinking the
cell by half from ~4 micron3 to a volume of ~2 micron3
. (Sorting
rotors covering ~2 micron2
 remove ~3 x 1010 molecules/sec-micron2
,
far outpacing possible backflows which may be crudely estimated
from maximum macrophage water-ingestion rates (Section
10.4.2.1), suggesting at most ~107 molecules/sec-micron2 across a
~13 micron2 bacterial surface.) Engulf formations of metamorphic
nanorobots (Section 5.3.4) could be especially useful in this
application.
Its volume halved, the bacterium is packed into a nanorobot
storage cannister of volume ~2 micron3 and is delivered to an
appropriate dedicated biodisposal organ or other biodisposal facility
(Section 10.4.2.4)—one dead bacterium per nanorobot. (A rigid
wet hollow peptidoglycan sphere of diameter ~2 microns and
thickness ~20 nm can be compacted into a 2-micron wide storage
cylinder by a 2-micron piston by applying an Euler buckling force
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 371
(Eqn. 9.44) of ~1540 nN, or ~5 atm; a dry peptidoglycan sphere of
this size would require ~10,000 atm to crush.) Serious infections of
~107 bacteria/cm3 (mean separation ~50 microns) thus require a
minimum therapeutic dose of 107 nanorobots/cm3
. Bacterial
clearance time for infected tissue at minimum dosage is dominated
by entry and withdrawal times (Chapter 16) for single-cell-payload
nanorobots, which may require several blood circulation times, but
is certainly less than 1000 sec.3233 An alternative suggestion is that
a desiccated bacterium could be “shrink-wrapped,” possibly using a
tightly wound surface webbing consisting of polymerized glucose
(e.g., cellulose or “string”), then flagged for phagocytic removal
(Section 10.4.1.2) and released, with the objective of improving
the microbe-processing speed of nanorobots. Unfortunately this
incautious approach allows bacterial DNA to remain intact. If the
wrapping is easily digestible, the prokaryote might escape confinement
prior to disposal, and reinflate; if not easily digestible, blockade of
the macrophage system could result.
Note that cellular RNA synthesis and protein synthesis stop
below 70%-80% hydration. All metabolism of small molecules, lipid
synthesis, amino acid synthesis, and CO2 fixation into organic
molecules ceases below ~35% hydration.941
10.4.2.5.2 Neuter and Release (NR)
After identification and docking, the nanorobot extends an
adhesion antenna tool (Section 9.3.2) into the bacterial interior and
sweeps it around inside. The antenna recognizes DNA and RNA
material including chromosomes, plasmids, and ribosomes. Any such
material found during antenna sweeps through the protoplasm
adheres to reversible binding sites on the antenna. The antenna of
diameter dant is then rotated Nrot ~ LDNA / π dant turns which is
sufficient to randomly enspool a chromosome strand of maximum
length LDNA; taking dant = 0.1 micron and LDNA = 1.3 mm for ~4.2
Mb E. coli, Nrot = 4100 turns which probably may be executed in
~1 sec without strand breakage because the bonding between chromosome and cellular matrix is likely noncovalent. The mean thickness
of the bolus of DNA that is tightly spooled around the antenna is
∆X = ((VDNA / π Lbolus) + (dant2 / 4))1/2 - (dant/2) = 12 nm, where
DNA volume VDNA ~ 4.2 x 106 nm3 at ~1 nm3
/bp and Lbolus ~ 1
micron is the bolus length.
The adhesion antenna* is retracted, with patching lipids ejected
from the tip as it clears the hole, thus auto-sealing the hole. The
adhered genetic material is pushed into a reaction chamber (Section
10.4.2.4.2), whereupon deoxyribonuclease enzymes are introduced
to reduce bacterial DNA to nucleotides which are then removed
from the solution by molecular sorting rotors and discharged.
Ribonucleases and peptidases are also present to reduce RNA and
ribosomes to dischargeable effluent, leaving the cell with no genetic
or transcription capability, effectively neutering the bacterium.
After minor surface modifications to enhance immune system
recognition (Section 10.4.1.2), the cell is abandoned to allow natural
phagocytic processes to run their course.
Table 10.6. Summary of Biochemical Composition and Net Digestion Breakdown Products of a Representative
4 µm3 Bacterium (modified from Becker313 and Lewin997)
Avg. Molecular Number of
Cell Component Cell Mass % Weight (daltons) Cell Mass (gm) Molecules
Inorganic:
Water 70.0% 18 3.0 x 10-12 1.0 x 1011
Salts 1.0% ~55 4.3 x 10-14 4.7 x 108
Organic:
Carbohydrates 3.0% ~180 1.3 x 10-13 4.3 x 108
Amino Acids 0.5% ~100 2.1 x 10-14 1.3 x 108
Nucleotides 0.5% ~308 2.1 x 10-14 4.2 x 107
Large Molecules:
Proteins 14.5% ~30,000 6.2 x 10-13 1.2 x 107
Lipids 2.0% ~700 8.5 x 10-14 7.3 x 107
Polysaccharides 2.0% ~1000 8.5 x 10-14 5.1 x 107
RNA 6.0% ~106 2.6 x 10-13 1.5 x 105
DNA 0.5% ~109 2.1 x 10-14 ~1
TOTALS:
100.0% --- 4.3 x 10-12 1.01 x 1011
Net Digestion Digestion Product Digestion Product Natural Blood Blood/Bacterium
Products # of Molecules Mass (gm) Conc. (gm/cm3
) Equivalents (#/cm3
)
(Water) 1.0 x 1011 3.0 x 10-12 ~0.94 3.1 x 1011
Inorganic Salts 4.7 x 108 4.3 x 10-14 ~7 x 10-3 1.6 x 1011
Fatty Acids 2.0 x 108 8.5 x 10-14 ~4 x 10-3 4.7 x 1010
Simple Sugars 7.1 x 108 2.1 x 10-13 ~2 x 10-3 9.4 x 109
Amino Acids 3.9 x 109 6.4 x 10-13 ~5 x 10-5 7.8 x 107
Nucleotides 5.8 x 108 3.0 x 10-13 ~1 x 10-6 3.3 x 106
TOTALS 1.1 x 1011 4.3 x 10-12 --- ---
* R. Bradbury suggests that a DNA-binding grappling hook mounted on a cable sliding inside a nanotube sheath could be inserted less disruptively through a bacterial cell
wall. The interior DNA strands are snagged and then pulled into the nanorobot through the sheath by retracting the cable.
372 Nanomedicine • Volume I
10.4.2.5.3 Liquefy, Digest and Discharge (LDD)
After identification and docking, the nanorobot extends a
retractible, self-cleaning, flexible diamondoid filament rotating
“eggbeater” tool (Section 9.3.2) into the bacterial interior and sweeps
the tool around inside the cell. A mechanical sensor that serves as a
registration bumper detects the presence of cell wall, allowing the
rapidly rotating mechanism to avoid damaging the bacterial outer
perimeter. A beater with four tines of length 500 nm, tine width 50
nm, and forward cutting edge 10 nm, bowed to a 200 nm diameter
and rotating at ~100 Hz has an equatorial velocity of ~60 micron/sec
and can cut material having tearing strength ~108 N/m2 (~maximum
for soft biological materials; Table 9.3) while consuming ~30 pW
(Eqn. 9.75) in continuous operation in highly viscous E. coli cytoplasm
(absolute viscosity η ~ 1000 kg/m-sec; Table 9.4). As liquefaction proceeds, the protoplasm may become less viscous, allowing rotation
rates to be increased and input power to be reduced.
After 1-10 sec, the appropriately liquefied material is pumped
from the exemplar 4 micron3 bacterium interior into the 1 micron3
enzymatic reaction chamber in ~0.01 micron3 aliquots and is processed as described earlier in ~100 millisec cycles consuming ~30
pW (Section 10.4.2.4.2). However, the LDD chamber also includes
lipases to digest lipids, amylases and related enzymes to digest carbohydrates, and molecular sorting rotors able to transport and discharge
fatty acids, sugars, and inorganic ions. A few specialized additional
enzymes may be required to fully digest unusual or rare metabolites
that might already be present or might appear during processing.
Processing time for ~400 cycles is ~40 sec. Finally, the bacterial coat,
plasma membrane, and flagella (another ~0.3 micron3 plus ~0.001
micron3
/flagellum) are sectioned, drawn into the reaction chamber,
processed in like fashion, and then discharged in an additional 30
chamber cycles or ~3 sec. Care should be taken not to fragment the
coat until nearly all of the cell contents are evacuated, thus
minimizing contamination of the extracellular environment. A few
additional sorting rotors and special processing may be required for
endotoxins, native cellular enzymes, indigestible bacterium-resident
poisons and heavy metals, and so forth. Operating simultaneously
and in parallel, all 1011 water molecules are discharged in ~50 sec
by 2000 sorting rotors drawing 20 pW. Thus, total processing time
is ~50 sec, consuming ~50 pW.
Table 10.6 also compares the composition of bacterial digestion
products to natural bloodstream concentrations of those same
products (Appendix B), and shows that the (extremely conservative)
maximum “safe” bacterium material discharge rate is nucleotide-limited
to ~107
 microbes/cm3
, which is near the typical microbial number
density in serious infections. Digested-bacterium material discharges
should not significantly augment natural serum concentrations of
most of these substances.
Processing 20-micron tissue cells may proceed by similar, but
more cautious, means, and will require on the order of one
nanorobot-day to digest and discharge each such cell. A cooperative
group of ~100 LDD nanorobots occupying ~10% of a tissue cell
surface can perform a complete disassembly and discharge in ~1000
sec, employing a group power draw of ~5000 pW for the duration.
10.4.2.6 Cytocarriage Disposal
Unwanted bacterial or other motile cells may be piloted to natural
disposal sites in the human body via cytocarriage (Section 9.4.7), a
potentially efficient pathogen-clearing technique that is elaborated
in greater detail in Volume II.
10.5 Temperature Effects on Medical Nanorobots
Will medical nanorobots retain functionality at unusually high
or low operating temperatures? This is an important question for
nanodevices at work in human limbs that may be subjected to hot
scalding, combustion, explosion, or other burn traumas, or, at the
cold temperature extreme, to severe frostbite or exposure of the
extremities whether in space or in arctic conditions, accidental ice
burial after an avalanche, or in situations requiring the repair and
resuscitation of cold-vitrified or cryogenically-preserved tissues,
organs, or whole organisms.
A complete review of the many effects of environmental temperature on the operations of medical nanodevices is beyond the
scope of this text. This Section can only briefly mention a few of
the many design issues that may arise if nanorobot operations are
contemplated significantly above or below normal human body
temperatures.
10.5.1 Dimensional Stability and Strength
At high applied stress, covalent bonds cleave much more readily
at higher temperatures. For example,10 at an applied stress of 8 nN/
bond a C=C double bond cleaves in ~1027 sec at 0 K, ~104
 sec at 300
K, and ~10-3 sec at 500 K. The positional uncertainty is somewhat less
problematic in design—the mean classical thermal longitudinal
displacement of a diamondoid logic rod varies only as ~T1/2.
10
The endpoint of such a rod 1 nm wide and 100 nm long displaces
~0.05 nm at 77 K (liquid N2), ~0.10 nm at 300 K, and ~0.14 nm at
600 K (liquid lead). Mechanical elements thus become more reliable at
lower temperature—e.g., the probability of error in a force sensor
(Section 4.4.1) scales as ~exp(1/T), so a 1% error in a sensor at 310
K increases to a 10% error at 600 K, but falls to just 10-6 % error at
77 K.
Most materials contract when cold and expand when hot
(although zirconium tungstate is a well-known exception2938). Thus
a 1000-nm long diamondoid rod at 310 K contracts to ~999 nm at
77 K and expands to 1001 nm at 600 K. However, the coefficients
of thermal expansion and various other thermophysical parameters are
themselves temperature-dependent. The coefficients of volumetric
thermal expansion at ~298 K (~25˚C) are 3.5 x 10-6 K-1 for diamond,
15.6 x 10-6 K-1 for sapphire, 1.2 x 10-6 K-1 for vitreous silica and
36 x 10-6 K-1 for crystalline silica or quartz.567
Young’s modulus (modulus of elasticity) and the other moduli
are also temperature-sensitive, especially and most obviously near
phase changes—e.g., sapphire melts at 2310 K but “softens” at
2070 K.1602 At ~1773 K, diamond plastically deforms at just ~1
atm pressure, but >60,000 atm are required to deform diamond
at ~1300 K.2041 At the cold extreme, anyone who has seen the
hammering of a nail using a piece of banana cooled in liquid N2
has witnessed the temperature sensitivity of materials strength.
10.5.2 Viscosity and Locomotion in Ice
The viscosity of liquids generally declines with rising temperature
following Andrade’s formula (Section 9.4.1.1); water is ~6 times more
viscous at 273 K (near freezing) than at 373 K (near boiling) (Table
9.4). Viscosity affects internal fluid transfers but also locomotion.
Natation in liquid nitrogen should require relatively less power than in
water, since liquid air (at 81 K) is only one-quarter as viscous as liquid
water at 310 K (Table 9.4).
An equally relevant but far more serious challenge is locomotion
through solid water ice. Just below freezing, crystalline ice viscosity is
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 373
~1010 kg/m-sec, requiring a 1-micron nanorobot to expend on
the order of ~200,000 pW to creep forward at 1 micron/sec (Eqn.
9.73) by viscoplastic flow in which ice crystals are deformed without
breaking. Just halfway from freezing to liquid nitrogen temperature, at 164 K, viscosity has already risen to ~1021 kg/m-sec,
roughly equivalent to solid mantle rock, and the power requirement has increased 100-billionfold, clearly prohibitive.
(Microdroplets of pure water may be supercooled in the liquid
state to 235 K at 1 atm, or 181 K at ~2000 atm.2965).
One solution that avoids this problem at temperatures near
the melting point is baronatation, which depends upon the fact
that water, almost uniquely, is less dense as a solid than a liquid
(i.e., ice floats), suggesting a freezing point depression effect with
increasing pressure that is visible as the short downleg from 0˚C
to –16˚C in the phase diagram for Ice Ih (Figure 10.11). This is
confirmed experimentally by suspending two heavy weights from
a wire stretched across a block of ice. The wire passes slowly
through the block, the wire exerting a pressure that melts a thin
layer of water ahead of it, allowing the wire to progress; as the
water passes behind the wire to the lower pressure region, it
refreezes, a process known as regelation.1697The melting ice ahead
of the wire absorbs the heat of fusion while the refreezing water
gives up the heat of fusion, with heat steadily transferred by the
wire, hence a good conductor cuts better than a poor one.1697
The barostatic freezing point depression constant for ice is 134
atm/˚C390,2050 up to ~2100 atm. By exerting a higher pressure
(force per unit area) ahead of it than behind it, a baronatating
nanorobot of roughly conical geometry can progress slowly
through ice that is no colder than –16˚C.
Taking the heat of fusion for water ice as ∆Hfus = 306 pJ/
micron3 (334 J/gm at 0˚C) and assuming at least ~3 micron3 of
ice must be melted to allow 1 micron of forward progress, then
baronatation power requirement is very conservatively estimated
as Pbaro ~ 3 ∆Hfus vnano ~ 900 pW for vnano = 1 micron/sec. (This
is energy flow, which is not necessarily energy dissipation, since
most of the heat loss will come from water refreezing at the rear
of the nanorobot and only the losses from finite thermal conductivity
must be made up.) Below –16˚C the ice would have to be heated
to that temperature before melting can occur, requiring a probably
prohibitive additional power dissipation Pheat ~ Lnano Kt ∆T
~22,000,000 pW to produce a ∆T = 10˚C warming of size Lnano
= 1 micron in ice assuming thermal conductivity of Kt ~
~2,200,000 pW/micron-˚C at -24˚C. Bejan and Tyvand2961 have
analyzed gravity-induced pressure-melting of ice due to the passage of
solid bodies having square, disklike, or cylindrical contact surfaces. The
details of compression-driven phase transitions in ice are also
being studied computationally using the tools of molecular
dynamics.2966,2967
The freezing point depression effect (Section 10.5.3) in which
solute molecules are released ahead and recovered behind might
serve as the basis for a similar drive system concept at temperatures just below the melting point.
Burrowing by progressive voids is yet another alternative that will
work over a wider range of cold temperatures. The binding energy per
hydrogen bond in the ice ahead is EHBond = 33 zJ/bond (4.6 Kcal/
mole,2036), there are two hydrogen bonds per water molecule,
and nwater = 3 x 1010 water molecules/micron3 in ice at 273 K, so
* An additional complication is that the uppermost molecular layers of ice may not be fully frozen. Experiments by Van Hove and Somorjai2699 show that even as cold as 90
K, the amplitude of vibrational motions in the topmost surface water monolayer is several times that of the water molecules buried deeper in the bulk ice. The second molecular
layer also has enhanced vibrational motion, but far less than the top monolayer. This excess motion is attributed to a lack of water molecules above the monolayer, hence
the monolayer molecules have fewer motion-restricting hydrogen bonds to other water molecules than those of the layers beneath the surface. At 200 K, the amorphous film
becomes thicker; above 230 K, the film becomes a quasi-liquid layer measured as ~12 nm thick at 249 K and ~30 nm thick at 268 K, rising to ~70 nm thick at 272.5 K.2701
H-bond-breaking power is at most PHBond ~ 2 EHBond nwater Lnano2
vnano = 2000 pW for a nanorobot of dimension L = 1 micron and
velocity vnano = 1 micron/sec. (Again, this is a conservative estimate because it may be possible to recapture some of the energy
that is liberated as the water molecules are returned to an ice lattice
at the rear of the nanorobot.)* Additionally, a molecule handling device of an efficiency comparable to the telescoping manipulator
arm (~10 zJ/nm per molecule; Section 3.4.3) that moves ice molecules a total distance ~10 nm to and from a conveyor device of
efficiency ~10-6 zJ/nm per molecule (Section 3.4.3) running a ~1
micron course consumes Etransport = 100.001 zJ/molecule, so
molecule-moving power is at most Pmove ~ Etransport nwater Lnano2
 vnano
= 3000 pW, hence total motive power for a 1-micron ice-burrowing
nanorobot moving at 1 micron/sec is at most ~5000 pW. Moving
ice in small chunks may be another energy-saving
alternative.
10.5.3 Solubility and Solvents
Gas solubility always declines, while the solubility of most solids
rises, with higher temperature (Section 9.2.6). Liquid solutes
behave as solids in this regard, but note that unit volumes of miscible
fluids are not precisely additive. For example, if one liter of ethanol
is added to 1 liter of water, the result is only 1.93 liters of solution.2036
A solution of a nonvolatile nonelectrolyte solute (e.g., glucose)
has a boiling point Tboil that is elevated above the boiling point of
pure solvent by ∆Tboil = n kb Ml, where Ml is the molality of the
solution (moles solute per kilogram of solvent), kb is the boiling
point constant for the solvent (Table 10.7), and n = 1. The presence
of solute also slightly lowers solvent freezing point Tfreeze by ∆Tfreeze
= n kf Ml, where kf is the freezing point constant for the solvent
(Table 10.7). Both effects are a direct consequence of the lowering
of solvent vapor pressure by a solute. The constants may be estimated
as:390

k R T MW
1000 H (˚C/molal) f
freeze
2
fus
= ∆ {Eqn. 10.22}

k R T MW
1000 H (˚C/molal) b
boil
2
vap
= ∆ {Eqn. 10.23}
where R = 8.31 J/mole-K (universal gas constant), MW is molecular
weight in gm/mole or daltons, Tfreeze and Tboil in K, and ∆Hfus and
∆Hvap are the heats of fusion and vaporization, respectively (Table
10.8).
In the case of electrolyte solutes (e.g., KCl) in dilute solutions
(e.g., Ml  0.01 molal), n is approximately the moles of ions per
mole of solute (e.g., n ~ 2 for KCl). In more concentrated solutions,
experimental values of n are slightly lower, as explained by
Debye-Huckel theory due to ion-ion and ion-solvent interactions.
For example, with KCl in water, n = 1.94 at Ml = 0.01 molal but n
= 1.80 at Ml = 0.50 molal.2050 The most concentrated salt solution
(e.g., 6.2 molal NaCl) depresses the freezing point of water by ~20˚C.
At still lower temperatures, solvents with much lower melting
points may be employed to avoid solvent freezing. In general,
substances dissolve in liquids that are chemically similar. Water
(itself a polar solvent) and many organic compounds including
374 Nanomedicine • Volume I
glucose are soluble in ethanol, which remains a liquid to -117˚C
(156 K).763 Sodium chloride is slightly soluble in ethanol, and also
in liquid ammonia which melts at -78˚C (195 K).763 Some natural
enzymes are known to retain their function in liquid ammonia, and
* Also, the nature of radiative transfer (Section 6.3.4.4(E)) changes drastically as the size of the box gets close to the wavelength of the peak of the distribution, e.g., 3-30
microns (100-1000 K; Eqn. 6.20) with heat transfer rates enhanced by up to several orders of magnitude,652,653 making sub-ambient cooling much more difficult.
others in supercritical carbon dioxide; artificial enzyme systems based
on natural peptides, or other polymers with protein-like conformational properties, could in principle operate in cryogenic solvents
such as tetrafluoromethane,261 carbon monoxide (a polar solvent,
liquid from -191.5˚C to -199˚C) or liquid nitrogen (a nonpolar
solvent, liquid -195.8˚C to -209.9˚C). Lactate dehydrogenase
enzyme found in cold water Antarctic fishes operates as fast as the
related enzyme in animals with higher body temperatures, even
though enzyme action normally halves for every 10˚C temperature
drop (Section 4.6.4). The Antarctic fish enzyme compensates for
the cold with modifications near the enzyme’s active site that
increase flexibility and mobility, in effect “greasing the hinges so
that the enzyme can move more quickly.”2152
10.5.4 Heat Conductivity and Capacity, and Refrigeration
Thermophysical characteristics of various materials at 310 K are
given in Table 8-12, but what is the temperature dependency? Heat
capacity (CV) generally rises with temperature. For example, the
heat capacity of ice rises from 0.63 x 106 J/m3
-K at -196˚C (liquid
N2) to 1.7 x 106 J/m3
-K at -30˚C.763 Thermal conductivity (Kt)
may have a more complicated relationship with temperature. For
example, the thermal conductivity of liquid water rises with temperature, from 0.561 W/m-K at 0˚C to 0.681 W/m-K at 100˚C.763
The thermal conductivity of sapphire normal to the optical or c-axis
also rises from 2.3 W/m-K at 310 K to 6.0 W/m-K at 900 K,
according to one source;2153 however, in the direction parallel to
the optical axis, the thermal conductivity of sapphire rises from 0.3
W/m-K at 3 K to a peak of ~200 W/m-K near 70 K, then falls to ~30
W/m-K at 310 K and ~6 W/m-K at 1000 K;2154 conductivity for
ruby falls from ~20 W/m-K at 310 K to ~6 W/m-K at 1000 K.2154
In the case of diamond, thermal conductivity rises from ~10 W/
m-K at 3 K to a peak of 12,500 W/m-K at 69 K, then falls to ~2000
W/m-K at 300 K.2154
Is it possible to build micron-scale refrigerators? Refrigerators
serve to maintain a temperature differential between an enclosed
volume and the external environment. Leaving aside vacuum isolation
levitation techniques (Section 6.3.4.4), thermal equilibration of a
volume of size L by conduction* requires an equilibration time of
approximately:

t ~
L C
K (sec) EQ
2
V
t
{Eqn. 10.24}
For water at 310 K, CV = 4.19 x 106 J/m3
-K and Kt = 0.623 W/
m-K,763 hence tEQ ~ (6.7 x 106
) L2 (sec) for in vivo medical
nanorobot refrigerators. Thus a cold box 1 mm wide requires tEQ ~
7 sec, but a 1 micron3 box equilibrates in only ~7 microsec. Diamond
is far more conductive; a 1 micron3 cold box embedded in a surplus
of diamondoid structure (CV = 1.8 x 106 J/m3
-K) inside a nanorobot
has a tEQ ~ (900) L2 = 0.9 nanosec equilibration time (giving a
~1011 kelvin/sec cool rate, assuming ∆T ~ 100 K). Thus in
order to avoid thermal re-equilibration with the surroundings, a ~1
micron3 refrigeration mechanism must circulate working coolant
fluid at a velocity vfluid ~ L / tEQ ~ 1000 m/sec, very near the speed
of sound in most fluids, hence sub-ambient refrigerators smaller
than ~1 micron3
 are not feasible using this method.
Drexler10 proposes a working fluid consisting of encapsulated
submicron water ice particles with surface structures preventing
aggregation and flexible enough to allow repeated expand/contract
Table 10.7. Molal Freezing and Boiling Point
Constants390,763,2036,2050
Freezing kf Boiling kb
Solvent Point (˚C) (˚C/molal) Point (˚C) (˚C/molal)
Acetic acid 16.6 3.90 118.5 2.93
Acetone -95.4 --- 56.2 1.71
Benzene 5.5 5.12 80.1 2.53
Camphor 176.0 40.0 209.0 5.95
Chloroform -63.5 4.73 61.2 3.63
Cyclohexane 6.5 20.2 81.0 2.79
Diethyl ether -116.2 --- 34.6 2.11
Ethanol -117.3 1.85 78.5 1.19
n-Hexane -95.0 1.75 68.0 2.75
Methanol -97.8 2.58 65.0 0.83
Naphthalene 80.2 6.85 217.9 ---
n-Octane -56.5 2.14 125.5 4.02
Phenol 43.0 7.27 182.0 3.56
Water 0.0 1.86 100.0 0.512
Table 10.8. Molar Heats of Fusion and Vaporization
at 1 atm390,763,1164,2036,2048,2050,2161
∆Hfus ∆Hvap
Substance (J/mole) (J/mole)
Acetic acid 11,700 24,400
Aluminum 10,500 230,000
Ammonia 5,660 23,400
Argon 1,110 6,540
Benzene 9,850 30,800
n-Butane 4,670 22,400
Carbon monoxide --- 6,080
Chlorine (Cl2) 6,410 20,100
Chloroform 9,220 29,500
Diethyl ether --- 26,000
Ethane 2,860 14,700
Ethanol 5,030 38,600
Fluorine (F2) 1,590 6,320
Helium 21 84
n-Hexane 13,000 28,900
Hydrogen (H2) 117 905
Iodine 16,800 44,000
Iron 1,290 380,000
Lead 5,080 170,000
Mercury 2,300 56,600
Methane 943 8,190
Methanol 3,170 35,300
Nitrogen (N2) 721 5,580
n-Octane 20,800 35,000
Oxygen 444 6,830
Platinum 22,200 520,000
Sapphire/Ruby 109,000 (decomp.)
Silver 9,520 250,000
Sodium Chloride 28,900 180,000
Water 6,017 40,690
Basic Capabilities • Other Basic Capabilities 375
cycles as the contained ice alternately freezes and thaws, combined
with a low-viscosity, low-melting point carrier such as a light hydrocarbon. The heat absorbed by a substance that melts at constant
temperature (the melting point) is the heat (or enthalpy) of fusion;
the much larger heat required to boil a liquid is the heat (or
enthalpy) of vaporization (Table 10.8); the heat of sublimation is
simply the sum of the two.390,2050 Phase changes provide the most
efficient cooling—ice absorbs 306 pJ/micron3 of heat when it melts
at 0˚C, and water absorbs 2170 pJ/micron3 when it boils at 100˚C,
but water at 37˚C absorbs only 42 pJ/micron3 when it warms by
10˚C. The exact temperature of a reversible phase transition in a
refrigerant working fluid can be precisely controlled by judicious
selection of operating pressures and fluid materials. Thermal-driven
phase-change microactuators have been tested.545
Many other possible refrigeration technologies are known but
have yet to be investigated in the context of nanorobot refrigeration,
including “magnetic cooling” by adiabatic demagnetization1031 or
magnetocaloric refrigerators,2159 Seebeck effect or Peltier effect
electronic cooling,1034,1035,2160,2933 thermoacoustic refrigeration
(Section 6.3.3), optical refrigerators,549 chemomechanical turbines
operated in reverse,597 heat of solvation cooling mediated by
molecular sorting rotors (e.g., KMnO4 cools solvent water by 44,000
J/mole,which is ~750 pJ/micron3 or ~73 zJ/molecule, as it dissolves,763)
heat of allotropic-transition cooling (e.g., transition from red α-HgI2
to yellow β-HgI2 absorbs ~13,000 J/mole or ~180 pJ/micron3
,
2036)
and acoustic, polymeric, or mechanical prevention of ice crystallization
during supercooling of working fluid.
10.5.5 Other Temperature-Dependent Properties
There are a great many temperature-dependent materials properties
of nanomedical relevance, but there is only space here to mention
just a few:
1. Denaturation and Combustion — Protein denaturation and
reduced receptor-ligand fidelity may occur at temperatures as low
as 50-100˚C. It is true that not much happens to a block of diamond
dropped into boiling water,280 but the maximum combustion point
for diamond in air is ~800˚C,691 and carbon nanotubes start to
burn in air at ~700˚C.1857 At low temperatures, receptor-ligand
binding may occur with greater fidelity but more slowly, and there
are various unusual biological effects that occur at low temperature—
for example, the lens of the human eye becomes opaque when cooled
to below freezing [G. Fahy, personal communication, 1997].
2. Speed of Sound — Acoustic waves travel at different speeds in
cold and hot media, potentially affecting medical nanorobot sensing,
energy transmission, communication and navigation. In general,
the speed of sound (vsound) in liquids depends upon the adiabatic
bulk modulus B and density ρ, both of which are
temperature-dependent, as vsound = (B/ρ)
1/2 (Eqn. 4.30). The temperature dependence of the speed of sound in pure water at 1 atm has
been carefully studied and is approximated fairly well by:2155

v ~ 1557 (0.0245)(347 T) sound
2 − − {Eqn. 10.25}
where T is temperature in K. Thus the speed of sound increases
with rising temperature up to a peak at 347 K (74˚C), then
decreases thereafter. For practically all other liquids, vsound
decreases with rising temperature over the entire range in which the
material remains a liquid.2156 (In most liquids, vsound increases linearly,
though only very slightly, with pressure. For example, vsound in benzene
rises ~17% when pressure is increased from 1 atm to 500 atm;2156
see also Section 10.3.3.) The speed of sound in water-ice just below
the freezing point, estimated from Eqn. 4.30, is ~1000 m/sec. The
speed of sound in dry air at 1 atm increases with rising temperature
and is approximated by:1164

v ~ 332 [1 (0. 03366)(T 273)] sound
1/2 + 0 − {Eqn. 10.26}
3. Energy Absorption — Acoustic absorption and attenuation
coefficients change with temperature, affecting the efficiency of
acoustic power transfer. Absorption per unit of radio frequency (rf)
energy in tissue during diathermic heating also varies with temperature.
4. Surface Tension — The surface tension of liquids at the
air-liquid interface tends to decline as temperature rises, falling to
zero at the boiling point. For instance, the air-liquid surface tension
for a 48% volumetric ethanol-water mixture (96 proof, U.S. spirit)
is 30.10 x 10-3 N/m at 20˚C but 28.93 x 10-3 N/m at 40˚C;763
values for pure water are given elsewhere (Section 9.2.3).
5. Dielectric Constant — The electrical properties of materials
may be temperature-dependent. For example, the dielectric constant
of water declines with rising temperature and is crudely
approximated by:2157

κ water ~ 80 − − 0.4 (T 293) {Eqn. 10.27}
for temperatures in kelvins from T = 273-373 K (0-100˚C), for rf
frequencies up to 100 MHz, and at 1 atm pressure. The dielectric
constant of ice at 0˚C is virtually the same as that of water (88.0),
but decreases rapidly with decreasing temperatures below 0˚C, and
with increasing frequency; by 0.1 MHz, κice ~ 2-4 with little influence
of temperature.2157 Relative permittivity decreases by a large factor
for many other substances as they change state at the freezing point;
for example, κ falls from 35 for liquid nitrobenzene at 279 K to 3
for solid nitrobenzene at 279 K.727 In general, nonpolar liquids have
a small dielectric constant (e.g., 1.5-2.5) that is nearly independent
of the temperature, whereas polar liquids have a larger value that
declines rapidly as temperature rises.2036
Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities, by Robert A. Freitas Jr. ©1999 Landes Bioscience.
AFTERWORD
Introduction
One of life's pleasures is writing an afterword for a classicin-the-making. Not only will some of the glory inevitably
rub off, there's also the illicit pleasure of having peeked at
the future, like peeking at the Christmas presents before Christmas.
A few of the possibilities of this new field of nanomedicine have
been hinted at, a few more have been sketched in some research
papers, but only with the publication of Nanomedicine have we
started to see the full richness of it.
Like cresting the top of a hill and beholding, for the first time
and in one sweep, the whole of a new land, our minds are both
captivated by the prospects and at another level churning with plans
and ideas and tasks. For at the same time we see what is possible, we
are also aware of the work that remains to be done to convert this
vision into reality. Nanomedicine is more than just a description of
what might be, it is a call to action. While it will take decades to
convert the possible to the actual, that is what we are called upon to
do—not only for the good of all, not only to advance our knowledge,
not only to help future generations, but to help ourselves as well.
The Long View
While planning beyond a decade is rare in this society, our lives
can span over a century. We should not be shortsighted or timid
about this. When I was a child, my sister was wise and very old: all
of twenty years in age! My parents, in their 40's, were old beyond
concepts of antiquity. Like the sky above and the ground beneath,
they had existed since the beginnings of time—at least, of my time.
Yet somehow I am now 47, and when I protest my age I am laughed
at by my grandmother-in-law who views me, from her 90's, as a
mere youth.
The field of nanomedicine will take decades to develop, but those
decades will pass and that future will arrive. Most of us will find we
are still here: a bit older, a bit slower, perhaps a bit wiser, yet still
filled with the excitement of life and the joy of living. Think of
yourself on that future day, looking back on what was and looking
forward to what will be. Will the future still be bright, still be open,
and still be filled with uncharted possibilities?
That depends on what we do today. If we ignore the future, if we
dismiss the decades ahead and focus narrowly on the next few weeks
or months, then the future will catch us by surprise, unprepared.
But if we start now, if we raise up our eyes from the distractions of
the moment and prepare for the future that we know will come,
then when that future arrives we will look back and be pleased with
what we did, and will look forward and be pleased with the even
greater possibilities of what we can do.
The Tasks Ahead
Perhaps the first task is to decide whether the capabilities
described so well in Nanomedicine are indeed possible. If they are,
then developing this new technology is a matter, quite literally, of
life and death for many of us, our children, and future generations.
Making this decision is harder than it might seem. As a society, we
deal with new ideas poorly if we deal with them at all. Most people
do not have the intellectual resources to directly evaluate new proposals, and so must rely on the statements of others. But those
who in principle might be able to evaluate a new idea and so help
our collective understanding often get it wrong. Looking back at a
few historical examples, we can begin to see the magnitude of the
difficulty.
John Aubrey, a contemporary of William Harvey, wrote this
account of the response to the publication in 1628 of Harvey's book
De Motu Cordis in which Harvey described his discovery of the
blood's circulation:
"...I heard Harvey say that after his book came out, he fell mightily in
his practice. 'Twas believed by the vulgar that he was crack-brained,
and all the physicians were against him. I knew several doctors in London
that would not have given threepence for one of his medicines.” 1
In 1873 Sir John Erichsen offered this grim assessment of the
future of surgery:
"There cannot always be fresh fields of conquest by the knife; there must
be portions of the human frame that will ever remain sacred from its
intrusions, at least in the surgeon's hands. That we have already, if not
quite, reached these final limits, there can be little question. The abdomen,
the chest, and the brain will be forever shut from the intrusion of the
wise and humane surgeon." 1
Nanomedicine, as Nanosystems2
 before it, is based on the laws of
physics which describe our world with phenomenal accuracy. Both
books advance arguments grounded on those laws, and both can
therefore be evaluated with respect to the accuracy of their conclusions
with respect to those laws. Nanosystems was published in 1992, and
no significant flaws have been found. Given the volume of public
debate and the number of people who have read the book, the simplest
explanation for this absence of reported errors is that its logic is
basically correct and its conclusions are basically sound. Today, these
conclusions are working their way into our collective decision making
processes and guiding our next steps. Research is being focused on
how best to develop this new technology, companies are being formed
to achieve the goals that we now accept as possible, and people are
beginning to grapple with the potential consequences.
Ralph C. Merkle, Ph.D.
Xerox PARC
378 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Nanomedicine, working from the foundations laid by Nanosystems,
develops the consequences of nanotechnology for medicine. These
consequences are extraordinary, and must be both explained and
publicly examined. We must firstly encourage the early review and
more rapid acceptance of Nanomedicine, for the next steps will only
be taken after concluding that its reasoning is largely sound and its
conclusions mostly correct—the same pattern we saw with
Nanosystems.
An Immediate Concern
Actually, there is one thing we must do even earlier: ensure the
completion of this exceptional series of books. What you are reading is
only Volume I. Volumes II and III, and the popular book to follow,
do not yet (as of 1999 when this is being written) exist, except in
Freitas' head.
We need to support him, in order to move this first and most
critical series to completion. This is always the hardest time for a
new idea—before it has been codified and laid out, before it has
been clothed in words, when it exists only as thoughts. The work of
making it solid and substantial is great, and yet this work is given
the least support.
What funding committee will agree to fund a book describing
an entire new field that has never before been dreamt of? Committees
base their conclusions on a shared understanding of a common body
of knowledge. Their members are drawn from an existing society of
experts to evaluate the next incremental improvement. What do
you do when there are no experts? Who lays claim to expertise in
nanomedicine? Who has spent their life in this field which is just
being conceived? No one. The committee process breaks down when
we move into truly new terrain. It fails us just when failure is most
expensive: at the beginnings of new things. Here we must fall back
on individuals—individuals who are bold enough to believe in
themselves when there are no experts to turn to for help and support.
Individuals who are willing to back up their own beliefs with
action, who will nurture the truly new and the truly groundbreaking
without having to first seek the approval of others. For there are no
others! On the far frontiers there are very few, and sometimes there
is only one.
The Research That Must Be Done
What happens later, when some significant part of society agrees
that nanomedicine will happen? Research.
• Research to clarify the goals and objectives. Just because people
agree it will happen doesn't mean they agree about how it will
happen, or when, or which sub-objectives should be given higher
priority, or....
• Research to persuade more people that nanomedicine is feasible.
Don't forget that this society runs on majority rule. If 20% of a
committee thinks an idea is worthwhile and should be pursued,
it still gets voted down.
• Research to identify early applications. The sooner we can
identify profitable opportunities that move us closer to the
long-term objectives, the sooner we can establish support that
doesn't require persuading committees.
• Research to advance our experimental capabilities. This
accomplishes two purposes: it moves us closer to the goal, and
it makes it easier for people to understand that the goal is feasible.
Broadly speaking, the research that must be done can be divided
into theoretical and experimental. The theoretical work includes
both traditional paper-and-pencil methods, and also the newer
methods of computational modeling and "digital experiments" made
possible by the computer. Theoretical and computational methods
can be applied to the proposals advanced in Nanomedicine both to
check feasibility and to provide more detailed understanding of the
performance and capabilities. Computational models in particular,
especially when they are based on detailed descriptions of physical
interactions, force a very thorough treatment of the design and bring
into the light any hidden assumptions.
Backward Chaining
Theoretical and computational methods can also be applied to
near-term and intermediate-term proposals. Achieving a long-term
objective often requires taking many steps, and all of those steps
except the first one are (pretty much by definition) not experimentally
accessible. While experimental work is focused on taking the next
step, the theoretical and computational work should be focused on
clarifying the whole pathway from today's technology to the future
applications. This feeds back into the experimental work in two
ways. First, it provides information about which approaches are more
likely or less likely to succeed. Second, it provides a reason for
supporting the experimental work. The value and feasibility of the
long-term objectives makes experimental progress more valuable,
and as this understanding spreads it becomes easier for experimentalists
to get funding for work that moves us closer to those long-range
objectives.
Consider one example: Freitas' respirocyte3 is based on the
observation that a red blood cell stores very little oxygen when
compared with a tank of similar size which holds oxygen compressed
to ~1,000 atmospheres. The design calls for strong materials (to
hold oxygen at high pressure) and very finely detailed structural
components (to control the release and storage of the oxygen).
On a theoretical and computational front, sub-components that
are composed of not-too-many atoms can be modeled in great detail.
The position of each atom and the forces between the atoms can be
modeled using techniques that provide remarkable accuracy and
simultaneously impose a discipline and rigor on the designer.
Compelling the designer to account for the location of every
atom, and to propose a design that fully satisfies the physical
laws incorporated into the computational model—a model that
has been checked and verified against countless other molecular
structures—prevents the designer from sidestepping awkward
issues that might cause the design to fail.
Such a design then feeds back important constraints on earlier
steps in the development process. For example, we must be able to
make very precise, very detailed, and very strong structures. The
material often proposed for this (and other nanotechnological)
applications is typically diamond and variants on diamond (structures
with a stiff hydrocarbon backbone and surface terminations that are
chemically stable; hydrogenated diamond surfaces are common, as
are the use of oxygen on (100) surfaces, nitrogen on (111) surfaces,
and the like). If stiff hydrocarbons are important, then we must
have good PEFs (Potential Energy Functions) for such structures in
order to perform molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics
calculations that are accurate. The use of Brenner's potential for
modeling hydrocarbons is common today, and extensions to this
potential to incorporate elements other than hydrogen and carbon,
as well as to improve its accuracy, are clearly of great importance to
the computational research aimed at developing nanotechnology.
The requirement for highly detailed structures made of stiff
hydrocarbons in turn implies we must analyze chemical reactions
able to synthesize such materials. The chemical reactions involved
Basic Capabilities • Afterword 379
in the growth of diamond are reasonably well understood, and many
reaction pathways have been proposed by which such growth can
occur. We can adopt reaction pathways similar to those seen in the
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth of diamond, but provide
finer control over where they occur by positioning the reacting
compounds using positional devices. Better computational methods
for analyzing individual reactions are possible using ab initio
methods, which can also provide accurate descriptions of the interactions of
small numbers of atoms which then feed into the design of better
PEFs. Better understanding of reactions relevant to the growth of
diamond can also be pursued experimentally, and particular reactions
of interest can be looked at in the laboratory as well as on a computer.
The need to position molecular components in its turn implies
we must consider positional devices—both improvements to today's
SPMs (Scanning Probe Microscopes) and future molecular scale
versions that are faster, more accurate, and have a greater range of
tip configurations. This implies a strong interest in experimental
and theoretical work on positioning devices, as well as work aimed
at improving SPM tips. Experimental work that shows greater
flexibility in arranging individual atoms and molecules should be
supported, as the potential consequences of this work are very great.
This process of working backwards from our desired goal to
near-term research objectives was called backward chaining by
Drexler.2 As can be seen, it is a method of analyzing a long-term
objective (e.g. using respirocytes to treat medical conditions) and
breaking down the steps needed to achieve that objective into nearerterm objectives (e.g. improving PEFs, experimental work in SPMs).
While the outline of the process given here is necessarily very short,
it should give the reader a feeling for the basic idea.
The procedure of targeting near-term research goals based on
their utility in achieving long-term objectives not only provides a
focus for research, it also produces a wealth of results which further
bolster the underlying arguments supporting the feasibility of the
objectives and the desirability of such research. This creates a recursive
spiral of knowledge. A little research shows there are no fundamental
barriers that prevent us from achieving the objectives of molecular
nanotechnology. Further research gives a better understanding of
which molecular machine systems should be feasible and provides
initial targets for additional research. Ongoing work is providing a
clearer picture of the routes that can move us from our present
technology base to the proposed molecular machines of the future,
and produces yet more targets for near-term efforts.
The Recursive Spiral of Knowledge
Every time we pursue further research in nanotechnology we
find that our original assessment of its basic feasibility is strengthened,
our understanding of the specific near-term research targets that we
must pursue is broadened, our conviction that further research can
speed the development of this fundamentally new and revolutionary
technology grows stronger, and our awareness of the astonishingly
pervasive benefits this technology can bring is widened. In this
recursive spiral of knowledge, research emboldens our interest and
increasing interest produces yet more research. The rate-limiting
process is the speed with which people take the first step, for having
taken the first step the second step comes a little faster, and the
third step faster still.
This should come as no real surprise, for either the ability to
arrange and rearrange molecular structures in most of the ways
permitted by physical law is feasible, or, alternatively, it is not. But
since Feynman's famous 1959 talk There's Plenty of Room at the
Bottom,4 every informed observer who has studied the issue has
drawn the same conclusion: it's feasible. The only way to break the
recursive spiral would be to discover a fundamental objection that
makes molecular machine systems impossible. As we are surrounded
by biological molecular machines, this possibility seems remote. If
thermal noise was a fundamental obstacle to molecular machine
design, then biological systems could not copy DNA and molecular
rotary motors could not rotate. If quantum uncertainty was a
fundamental obstacle, then ribosomes could not synthesize proteins
and sodium channels could not distinguish between sodium and
potassium.
A New Medical Technology And A New Era Of
Medicine
We are left, then, with a fairly clear set of conclusions. Living
systems exist. Living systems can usually heal and cure their own
injuries, unless those injuries are severe enough to prevent the living
system from functioning. Too often, we suffer injuries that are
indeed this severe. Molecular nanotechnology is feasible. As we
master the ability to design molecular machines that can continue
to function when the living system around them has failed, those
molecular machines can restore the function of the living system.
They can support and sustain the processes of the living system
until that living system can once again function on its own. Whether
this is done by a temporary assist from respirocytes3 or by any of the
myriad other techniques discussed in Nanomedicine, the underlying
message is clear: life and health can be restored and sustained in the
face of greater injury, greater damage, greater trauma, and greater
dysfunction than has ever before been realized. This will usher in a
new era of medicine—an era in which health and long life will be
the usual state of affairs while sickness, debility and death will be
the mercifully rare exceptions.
The future capabilities of nanomedicine give hope and inspiration
to those of us who still have decades of life to look forward to, but
some are not so fortunate. Many others who rightfully should live
several decades more might find that chance cuts short their
expected time. Heart attacks and cancer can strike us down even in
the prime of our lives. They do not always wait their turn and
politely arrive only when expected. How can today's dying patient
take advantage of a future medical technology that is as yet only
described in a handful of theoretical publications? How can we
preserve the physical structure of our bodies well enough to permit that
future medical technology to restore our health?
The extraordinary medical prospects ahead of us have renewed
interest in a proposal made long ago: that the dying patient could
be frozen, then stored at the temperature of liquid nitrogen for
decades or even centuries until the necessary medical technology to
restore health is developed. Called cryonics, this service is now
available from several companies. Because final proof that this will
work must wait until after we have developed a medical technology
based on the foundation of a mature nanotechnology, the procedure is
experimental. We cannot prove today that medical technology will
(or will not) be able to reverse freezing injury 100 years from now.
But the patient dying today must choose whether to join the
experimental group or the control group. The luxury of waiting for
a definitive answer before choosing is simply not available. So the
decision must be made today, on the basis of incomplete information.
We already know what happens to the control group. The outcome
for the experimental group has not yet been confirmed. But given
the wonderful advances that we see coming, it seems likely that we
should be able to reverse freezing injury—especially when that
injury is minimized by the rapid introduction through the vascular
system of cryoprotectants and other chemicals to cushion the tissues
against further injury.
380 Nanomedicine • Volume I
Conclusion
The development of nanomedicine depends on us: what we do
and how rapidly we do it. Research is not done by a faceless "them,"
nor is it something that happens spontaneously and without any
human intervention. It is done by and supported by people. Unless
we decide to support and pursue this research, it won't happen.
How long it takes to develop depends on us. We are not idle bystanders
watching the world go by. We are a part of it. If we sit and wait for
someone else to develop this technology, it will happen much more
slowly. If we jump in and work to make it happen, it will happen
sooner. And developing a life saving medical technology within our
lifetimes seems like a very good idea—certainly better than the
alternative.